
          eVersion 2.0 - see revision notes at end of text <#rev>


  The Day of The Triffids


        by


    John Wyndham




        CONTENTS



I
	THE END BEGINS <#ch01>
II
	THE COMING OF THE TRIFFIDS <#ch02>
III
	THE GROPING CITY <#ch03>
IV
	SHADOWS BEFORE <#ch04>
V
	A LIGHT IN THE NIGHT <#ch05>
VI
	RENDEZVOUS <#ch06>
VII
	CONFERENCE <#ch07>
VIII
	FRUSTRATION <#ch08>
IX
	EVACUATION <#ch09>
X
	TYNSHAM <#ch10>
XI
	?AND FARTHER ON <#ch11>
XII
	DEAD END <#ch12>
XIII
	JOURNEY IN HOPE <#ch13>
XIV
	SHIRNING <#ch14>
XV
	WORLD NARROWING <#ch15>
XVI
	CONTACT <#ch16>
XVII
	STRATEGIC WITHDRAWAL <#ch17>




------------------------------------------------------------------------



        I
        THE END BEGINS



When a day that you happen to know is Wednesday starts off by sounding
like Sunday, there is something seriously wrong somewhere.

I felt that from the moment I woke. And yet, when I started functioning
a little more smartly, I became doubtful. After all, the odds were that
it was I who was wrong, and not everyone else?though I did not see how
that could be. I went on waiting, tinged with doubt. But presently I had
my first bit of objective evidence?a distant clock stuck what sounded to
me just like eight. I listened hard and suspiciously. Soon another clock
began, on a hard, decisive note. In a leisurely fashion it gave an
indisputable eight. Then I /knew /things were awry.

The way I came to miss the end of the world?well, the end of the world I
had known for close on thirty years?was sheer accident: like a lot of
survival, when you come to think of it. In the nature of things a good
many somebodies are always in hospital, and the law of averages had
picked on me to be one of them a week or so before. It might just as
easily have been the week before that?in which case I?d not be writing
now: I?d not be here at all. But chance played it not only that I should
be in hospital at that particular time, but that my eyes, and indeed my
whole head, should be wreathed in bandages?and that?s why I have to be
grateful to whoever orders these averages. At the time, however, I was
only peevish, wondering what in thunder went on, for *I *had been in the
place long enough to know that, next to the matron, the clock is the
most sacred thing in a hospital.

Without a clock the place simply couldn?t work. Each second there?s
someone consulting it on births, deaths, doses, meals, lights, talking,
working, sleeping, resting, visiting, dressing, washing?and hitherto it
had decreed that someone should begin to wash and tidy me up at exactly
three minutes after 7 A.M. That was one of the best reasons I had for
appreciating a private room. In a public ward the messy proceeding would
have taken place a whole unnecessary hour earlier. But here, today,
clocks of varying reliability were continuing to strike eight in all
directions?and still nobody had shown up.

Much as I disliked the sponging process, and useless as it had been to
suggest that the help of a guiding hand as far as the bathroom could
eliminate it, its failure to occur was highly disconcerting. Besides, it
was normally a close forerunner of breakfast, and I was feeling hungry.

Probably I would have been aggrieved about it any morning, but today,
this Wednesday, May 8, was an occasion of particular personal
importance. I was doubly anxious to get all the fuss and routine over
because this was the day they were going to take off my bandages.

I groped around a bit to find the bell push and let them have a full
five seconds? clatter, just to show what I was thinking of them.

While I was waiting for the pretty short-tempered response that such a
peal ought to bring, I went on listening.

The day outside, I realized now, was sounding even more wrong than I had
thought. The noises it made, or failed to make, were more like Sunday
than Sunday itself?and I?d come round again to being absolutely assured
that it /was /Wednesday, whatever else had happened to it.

Why the founders of St. Merryn?s Hospital chose to erect their
institution at a main-road crossing upon a valuable office site, and
thus expose their patients? nerves to constant laceration, is a foible
that I never properly understood. But for those fortunate enough to be
suffering from complaints unaffected by the wear and tear of continuous
traffic, it did have the advantage that one could lie abed and still not
be out of touch, so to speak, with the flow of life. Customarily the
west-bound busses thundered along trying to beat the lights at the
corner; as often as not a pig-squeal of brakes and a salvo of shots from
the silencer would tell that they hadn?t. Then the released cross
traffic would rev and roar as it started up the incline. And every now
and then there would be an interlude: a good grinding bump, followed by
a general stoppage?exceedingly tantalizing to one in my condition, where
the extent of the contretemps had to be judged entirely by the degree of
profanity resulting. Certainly, neither by day nor during most of the
night, was there any chance of a St. Merryn patient being under the
impression that the common round had stopped just because he,
personally, was on the shelf for the moment.

But this morning was different. Disturbingly, because

mysteriously, different. No wheels rumbled, no busses roared, no sound
of a car of any kind, in fact, was to be heard; no brakes, no horns, not
even the clopping of the few rare horses that still occasionally passed;
nor, as there should be at such an hour, the composite tramp of
work-bound feet.

The more I listened, the queerer it seemed?and the less I cared for it.
In what I reckoned to be ten minutes of careful listening I heard five
sets of shuffling, hesitating footsteps, three voices bawling
unintelligibly in the distance, and the hysterical sobs of a woman.
There was not the cooing of a pigeon, not the chirp of a sparrow.
Nothing but the humming of wires in the wind.

A nasty, empty feeling began to crawl up inside me. It was the same
sensation I used to have sometimes as a child when I got to fancying
that horrors were lurking in the shadowy corners of the bedroom; when I
daren?t put a foot out for fear that something should reach from under
the bed and grab my ankle; daren?t even reach for the switch lest the
movement should cause something to leap at me. I had to fight down the
feeling, just as I had had to when I was a kid in the dark. And it was
no easier. It?s surprising how much you don?t grow out of when it comes
to the test. The elemental fears were still marching along with me,
waiting their chance, and pretty nearly getting it?just because my eyes
were bandaged and the traffic had stopped. .

When I had pulled myself together a bit, I tried the reasonable
approach. Why /does /traffic stop? Well, usually because the road is
closed for repairs. Perfectly simple. Any time now they?d be along with
pneumatic drills as another touch of aural variety for the
long-suffering patients. But the trouble with the reasonable line was
that it went further. It pointed out that there was not even the distant
hum of traffic, not the whistle of a train, not the hoot of a tugboat.
Just nothing?until the clocks began chiming a quarter past eight.

The temptation to take a peep?not more than a peep, of course; just
enough to get some idea of what on earth could be happening?was immense.
But I restrained it. For one thing, a peep was a far less simple matter
than it sounded. It wasn?t just a case of lifting a blindfold: there
were a lot of pads and bandages. But, more important, I was scared to
try. Over a week?s complete blindness can do a lot to frighten you out
of taking chances with your sight. It was true that they intended to
remove the bandages today, but that would be done in a special dim
light, and they would allow them to stay off only if the inspection of
my eyes were satisfactory.


I did not know whether it would be. It might be that my sight was
permanently impaired. Or that I would not be able to see at all. I did
not know yet.

I swore and laid hold of the bell push again. It helped to relieve my
feelings a bit.

No one, it seemed, was interested in bells. I began to get as much sore
as worried. It?s humiliating to be dependent, anyway, but it?s a still
poorer pass to have no one to depend on. My patience was whittling down.
Something, I decided, had got to be done about it.

If I were to bawl down the passage and generally raise hell, somebody
ought to show up if only to tell me what they thought of me. I turned
back the sheet and got out of bed. I?d never seen the room I was in, and
though I had a fairly good idea by ear of the position of the door, it
wasn?t all that easy to find. There seemed to be several puzzling and
unnecessary obstacles, but I got across at the cost of a stubbed toe and
minor damage to my shin. I shoved out into the passage.

?Hey!? I shouted. ?I want some breakfast. Room forty-eight!?

For a moment nothing happened. Then came voices all shouting together.
It sounded like hundreds of them, and not a word coming through clearly.
It was as though I?d put on a record of crowd noises?and an ill-disposed
crowd, at that. I had a nightmarish flash, wondering whether I had been
transferred to a mental home while I was sleeping and that this was not
St. Merryn?s Hospital at all. The sound of those voices simply didn?t
sound normal to me. I closed the door hurriedly on the babel and groped
my way back to bed. At that moment bed seemed to be the one safe,
comforting thing in my whole baffling environment. As if to underline
that, there came a sound which checked me in the act of pulling up the
sheets. From the street below rose a scream, wildly distraught and
contagiously terrifying. It came three times, and when it had died away
it seemed still to tingle in the air.

I shuddered. I could feel the sweat prickle my forehead under the
bandages. I knew now that something fearful and horrible was happening.
I could not stand my isolation and helplessness any longer. I had to
know what was going on around me. My hands went up to my bandages; then,
with my fingers on the safety pins, I stopped.


Suppose the treatment had not been successful? Suppose that when I took
the bandages off I were to find that I still could not see? That would
be worse still?a hundred times worse....I lacked the courage to be alone
and find out that they had not saved my sight. And even if they had,
would it be safe yet to keep my eyes uncovered?


I dropped my hands and lay back. I was mad at myself and the place, and
I did some silly, weak cursing.

Some little while must have passed before I got a proper hold on things
again, but after a bit I found myself churning round in my mind once
more after a possible explanation. I did not find it*. *But I did become
absolutely convinced that, come all the paradoxes of hell, it was
Wednesday. For the previous day had been notable, and I could swear that
no more than a single night had passed since then.  

You?ll find it in the records that on Tuesday, May 7, the Earth?s orbit
passed through a cloud of comet debris. You can even believe it, if you
like?millions did. Maybe it was so*. *I can?t prove anything either way.
II was in no state to see what happened myself; but I do have my own
ideas. All that I actually know of the occasion is that I had to spend
the evening in my bed listening to eyewitness accounts of what was
constantly claimed to be the most remarkable celestial spectacle on record.

And yet, until the thing actually began, nobody had ever heard a word
about this supposed comet, or its debris.

Why they broadcast it, considering that everyone who could walk, hobble,
or be carried was either out of doors or at windows enjoying the
greatest free firework display ever, I don?t know. But they did, and it
helped to impress on me still more heavily what it meant to be
sightless. I got around to feeling that if the treatment had not been
successful I?d rather end the whole thing than go on that way.

It was reported in the news bulletins during the day that mysterious
bright green flashes had been seen in the Californian skies the previous
night. However, such a lot of things did happen in California that no
one could be expected to get greatly worked up over that, but as further
reports came in, this comet-debris motif made its appearance, and it stuck.

Accounts arrived from all over the Pacific of a night made brilliant by
green meteors said to be ?sometimes in such numerous showers that the
whole sky appeared to be wheeling about us.? And so it was, when you
come to think of it.

As the nightline moved westward the brilliance of the display was in no
way decreased. Occasional green flashes became visible even before
darkness fell. The announcer, giving an account of the phenomenon in the
six o?clock news, advised everyone that it was an amazing scene and one
not to he missed. He mentioned also that it seemed to be interfering
seriously with shortwave reception at long distances, but that the
medium waves on which there would be a running commentary were
unaffected, as, at present, was television. He need not have troubled
with the advice. By the way everyone in the hospital got excited about
it, it seemed to me that there was not the least likelihood of anybody
missing it?except myself.

And as if the radio?s comments were not enough, the nurse who brought me
my supper had to tell me all about it.

?The sky?s simply full of shooting stars.? she said. ?All bright green.
They make people?s faces look frightfully ghastly. Everybody?s out
watching them, and sometimes it?s almost as light as day?only all the
wrong color. Even? now and then there?s a big one so bright that it
hurts to look at it. It?s a marvelous sight. ?They say there?s never
been anything like it before. It is such a pity you can?t see it, isn?t it??

?It is,? I agreed somewhat shortly.

?We?ve drawn back the curtains in the wards so that they can all see
it,? she went on. ?If only you hadn?t those bandages you?d have a
wonderful view of it from here.?

?Oh,? I said.

?But it must be better still outside, though. They say thousands of
people are out in the parks and on the heath watching it all. And on all
the flat roofs you can see people standing and looking up.?

?How long do they expect it to go on?? I asked patiently.

?I don?t know, but they say it?s not so bright now as it was in other
places. Still, even if you?d had your bandages off today, I don?t expect
they?d have let you watch it. You?ll have to take things gently at
first, and some of the flashes are very bright. ?They????Ooooh!?

?Why ?oooh??? I inquired.

?That was such a brilliant one then?it made the whole room look green.
What a pity you couldn?t see it.?

?Isn?t it?? I agreed. ?Now do go away, there?s a good girl.? I tried
listening to the radio, but it was making the same ?ooohs? and ?aaahs,?
helped out by gentlemanly tones which blathered about this ?magnificent
spectacle? and ?unique phenomenon? until I began to feel that there was
a parry for all the world going on, with me as the only person not invited.


I didn?t have any choice of entertainment, for the hospital radio system
gave only one program, take it or leave it. After a bit I gathered that
the show had begun to wane. The announcer advised everyone who had not
yet seen it to hurry up and do so, or regret all his life that he had
missed it.

The general idea seemed to be to convince me that I was passing up the
very thing I was born for. In the end I got sick of it and switched off.
The last thing I heard was that the display was diminishing fast now and
that we?d probably be out of the debris area in a few hours.

There could be no doubt in my mind that all this had taken place the
previous evening?for one thing, I should have been a great deal hungrier
even than I was had it been longer ago. Very well, what was this, then?
Had the whole hospital, the whole city made such a night of it that
they?d not pulled round yet?

About which point I was interrupted as the chorus of clocks, near and
far, started announcing nine.

For the third time I played hell with the bell. As I lay waiting I could
hear a sort of murmurousness beyond the door. It seemed composed of
whimperings, slitherings, and shufflings, punctuated occasionally by a
raised voice in the distance.

But still no one came to my room.

By this time I was slipping back once more. The nasty, childish fancies
were on me again. I found myself waiting for the unseeable door to open
and horrible things to come padding in?in fact, I wasn?t perfectly sure
that somebody or something wasn?t in already, and stealthily prowling
round the room. ...

Not that I?m given to that kind of thing really. It was those damned
bandages over my eyes, the medley of voices that had shouted back at me
down the corridor. But I certainly was getting the willies?and once you
get ?em, they grow. Already they were past the stage where you can shoo
them off by whistling or singing at yourself.

It came at last to the straight question: was I more scared of
endangering my sight by taking off the bandages or of staying in the
dark with the willies growing every minute?

If it had been a day or two earlier, I don?t know what I?d have
done?very likely the same in the end?but this day I could at least tell
myself:

?Well, hang it, there can?t be a lot of harm if I use common sense.
After all, the bandages are due to come off today. I?ll risk it.?


There?s one thing I put to my credit. I was not far enough gone to tear
them off wildly. I had the sense and the self-control to get out of bed
and pull the shade down before I started on the safety pins.

Once I had the coverings off, and had found out that I could see in the
dimness, I felt a relief that I?d never known before. Nevertheless, the
first thing I did after assuring myself that there were indeed no
malicious persons or things lurking under the bed or elsewhere was to
slip a chair back under the door handle. I could and did begin to get a
better grip on myself then. I made myself take a full hour gradually
getting used to full daylight. At the end of it I knew that thanks to
swift first aid, followed by good doctoring, my eyes were as good as ever.

But still no one came.

On the lower shelf of the bedside table I discovered a pair of dark
glasses thoughtfully put ready against my need of them. Cautiously I put
them on before I went right close to the window. The lower pan of it was
not made to open, so that the view was restricted. Squinting down and
sideways, I could see one or two people who appeared to be wandering in
an odd, kind of aimless way farther up the street. But what struck me
most, and at once, was the sharpness, the clear definition of
everything?even the distant housetops view across the opposite roofs.
And then I noticed that no chimney, large or small, was smoking. ...

I found my clothes hung tidily in a cupboard. I began to feel more
normal once I had them on. There were some cigarettes still in the case.
I lit one and began to get into the state of mind where, though
everything was still undeniably queer, I could no longer understand why
I had been quite so near panic.

It is not easy to think oneself back to the outlook of those days. We
have to he more self-reliant now. But then there was so much routine,
things were so interlinked. Each one of us so steadily did his little
part in the right place that it was easy to mistake habit and custom for
the natural law?and all the more disturbing, therefore, when the routine
was in any way upset.

When almost half a lifetime has been spent in one conception of order,
reorientation is no five-minute business. Looking back at the shape of
things then, the amount we did not know and did not care to know about
our daily lives is not only astonishing but somehow a bit shocking. I
knew practically nothing, for instance, of such ordinary things as how
my food reached me, where the fresh water came from, bow the clothes I
wore were woven and made, how the drainage of cities kept them healthy.
Our life had become a complexity of specialists, all attending to their
own jobs with more or less efficiency and expecting others to do the
same. That made it incredible to me, therefore, that complete
disorganization could have overtaken the hospital. Somebody somewhere, I
was sure, must have it in hand? unfortunately it was a somebody who had
forgotten all about Room 48.

Nevertheless, when I did go to the door again and peer into the corridor
I was forced to realize that, whatever bad happened, it was affecting a
great deal more than the single inhabitant of Room 48.

Just then there was no one in sight, though in the distance I could hear
a pervasive murmur of voices. There was a sound of shuffling footsteps,
too, and occasionally a louder voice echoing hollowly in the corridors,
but nothing like the din I had shut out before. This time I did not
shout. I stepped out cautiously?why cautiously? I don?t know. There was
just something that induced it.

It was difficult in that reverberating building to tell where the sounds
were coming from, but one way the passage finished at an obscured French
window, with the shadow of a balcony rail upon it, so I went the other.
Rounding a corner, I found myself out of the private-room wing and on a
broader corridor.

At the far end of the wide corridor were the doors of a ward. The panels
were frosted save for ovals of clear glass at face level,

I opened the door. It was pretty dark in there. The curtains had
evidently been drawn after the previous night?s display was over?and
they were still drawn.

?Sister?? I inquired.

?She ain?t ?ere,? a man?s voice said. ?What?s more,? it went on,

?she ain?t been ?ere? for ruddy hours, neither. Can?t you pull them
ruddy curtains, mate, and let?s ?ave some flippin? light? Don?t know
what?s come over the bloody place this morning.?

?Okay,? I agreed.

Even if the whole place were disorganized, it didn?t seem to be any good
reason why the unfortunate patients should have to lie in the dark.

I pulled back the curtains on the nearest window and let in a shaft of
bright sunlight. It was a surgical ward with about twenty patients, all
bedridden. Leg injuries mostly; several amputations, by the look of it.

?Stop foolin? about with ?em, mate, and pull ?em back,? said the same voice.

I turned and looked at the man who spoke. He was a dark, burly fellow
with a weather-beaten skin. He was sitting up in bed, facing directly at
me?and at the light. His eyes seemed to be gazing into my own; so did
his neighbor?s, and the next man?s.

For a few moments I stared back at them. It took that long to register.
Then: ?I?they?they seem to be stuck,? I said. ?I?ll find someone to see
to them.?

And with that I fled from the ward.

I was shaky again, and I could have done with a stiff drink. The thing
was beginning to sink in. But I found it difficult to believe that all/
/the men in that ward could be blind, and yet...

The elevator wasn?t working, so I started down the stairs. On the next
floor I pulled myself together and plucked up the courage to look into
another ward. The beds there were all disarranged. At first I thought
the place was empty, but it wasn?t?not quite. Two men in nightclothes
lay on the floor. One was soaked in blood from an unhealed incision, the
other looked as if some kind of congestion had seized him*. *They were
both quite dead. The rest had gone.

Back on the stairs once more, I realized that most of the background
voices I had been hearing all the time were coming up from below, and
that they were louder and closer now. I hesitated a moment, but there
seemed to be nothing for it but to go on making my way down.

On the next turn I nearly tripped over a man who lay across my way in
the shadow. At the bottom of the flight lay somebody who actually had
tripped over him?and cracked his head on the stone steps as he landed.

At last I reached the final turn where I could stand and look down into
the main hail. Seemingly everyone in the place who was able to move must
have made instinctively for that spot, either with the idea of finding
help or of getting outside. Maybe some of them had got out. One of the
main entrance doors was wide open, but most of them couldn?t find it.
There was a tight-packed mob of men and women, nearly all of them in
their hospital nightclothes, milling slowly and helplessly around. The
motion pressed those on the outskirts cruelly against marble corners or
ornamental projections. Some of them were crushed breathlessly against
the walls. Now and then one would trip. If the press of bodies allowed
him to fall, there was little chance that it would let him come up again.

The place looked?well, maybe you?ll have seen some of Dore?s pictures of
sinners in hell. But Dore couldn?t include the sounds: the sobbing, the
murmurous moaning, and occasionally a forlorn cry.

A minute or two of it was all I could stand. I fled back up the stairs.

There was the feeling that I ought to do something about it. Lead them
out into the street, perhaps, and at least put an end to that dreadful
slow milling. But a glance had been enough to show that I could not hope
to make my way to the door to guide them there. Besides, if I were to,
if I did get them outside?what then?

I sat down on a step for a while to get over it, with my head in my
hands and that awful conglomerate sound in my ears all the time. Then I
searched for, and found, another staircase. It was a narrow service
flight which led me out by a back way into the yard.


Maybe I?m not telling this part too well. The whole thing was so
unexpected and shocking that for a time I deliberately tried not to
remember the details. Just then I was feeling much as though it were a
nightmare from which I was desperately but vainly seeking the relief of
waking myself. As I stepped out into the yard I still half refused to
believe what I had seen.

But one thing I was perfectly certain about. Reality or nightmare, I
needed a drink as I had seldom needed one before.

There was nobody in sight in the little side street outside the yard
gates, but almost opposite stood a pub. I can recall its name now?the
Alamein Arms. There was a board bearing a reputed likeness of Viscount
Montgomery hanging from an iron bracket, and below it one of the doors
stood open.

I made straight for it.

Stepping into the public bar gave me for the moment a comforting sense
of normality. It was prosaically and familiarly like dozens of others.

But although there was no one in that part, there was certainly
something going on in the saloon bar, round the corner.


I heard heavy breathing. A cork left its bottle with a pop. A pause.
Then a voice remarked:

?Gin, blast it! T?hell with gin!?

There followed a shattering crash. The voice gave a sozzled chuckle.

?Thash th?mirror. Wash good of mirrors anyway??

Another cork popped.

?S?darnned gin again,? complained the voice, offended.

/?T?hell /with gin.?

This time the bottle hit something soft, thudded to the floor, and lay
there gurgling away its contents.

?Hey!? I called. ?I want a drink.? There was a silence. Then:

?Who?re you?? the voice inquired cautiously.

?I?m from the hospital,? I said. ?I want a drink.? ?Don? ?member y?r
voice. Can you see??

?Yes,? I told him.

?Well, then, for God?s sake get over the bar, Doc, and find me a bottle
of whisky.?

?I?m doctor enough for that,? I said

I climbed across and went round the corner. A large-bellied, red-faced
man with a graying walrus mustache stood there clad only in trousers and
a collarless shirt. He was pretty drunk. He seemed undecided whether to
open the bottle he held in his band or to use it as a weapon.

??F you?re not a doctor, what are you?? he demanded suspiciously.

?I was a patient?but I need a drink as much as any doctor,? I said.
?That?s gin again you?ve got there,? I added.

?Oh, is it! Damned gin,? he said, and slung it away. It went through the
window with a lively crash.

?Give me that corkscrew,? I told him.

I took down a bottle of whisky from the shelf, opened it, and handed it
to him with a glass. For myself I chose a stiff brandy with very little
soda, and then another. After that my hand wasn?t shaking so much.

I looked at my companion. He was taking his whisky neat, out of the bottle.

?You?ll get drunk,? I said.

He paused and turned his head toward me. I could have sworn that his
eyes really saw me.

?Get drunk! Damn it, I /am /drunk,? he said scornfully. He was so
perfectly right that I didn?t comment. He brooded a moment before he
announced:

?Gotta get drunker. Gotta get mush drunker.? He leaned closer.


 ?D?you know what? I?m blind. Thash what I am? blind?s a bat.
Everybody?s blind?s a bat. ?Cept you. Why aren?t you blind?s a bat??

?I don?t know,? I told him.

??S that bloody comet. Thash what done it. Green shootin? shtarsh?an?
now everyone?s blind?s a hat. D?ju shee green shootin? shtarsh??

?No,? I admitted.

?There you are. Proves it. You didn?t see ?em: you aren?t blind.
Everyone else saw ?em??he waved an expressive arm

??all?s blind?s bats. Bloody comets, I say.?

I poured myself a third brandy, wondering whether there might not be
something in what he was saying.

/?Everyone /blind?? I repeated.

?Thash it. All of ?em. Prob?ly everyone in th?world??cept you,? he added
as an afterthought.

?How do you know?? I asked.

??S?easy. Listen!? he said.

We stood side by side, leaning on the bar of the dingy pub, and
listened. There was nothing to be heard?nothing but the rustle of a
dirty newspaper blown down the empty street. Such a quietness held
everything as cannot have been known in those parts for a thousand years
and more.

?See what I mean? ?S?obvious,? said the man.

/?Yes,? /I said slowly. ?Yes?I see what you mean.?

I decided that I must get along. I did not know where to. But I must
find out more about what was happening.

?Are you the landlord?? I asked him.

?Wha? ?f I am?? he demanded defensively.

?Only that I?ve got to pay someone for three double brandies.?

?Ah?forget it.?

?But look here

?Forget it, I tell you. D?ju know why? ?Cause what?s the good ?f money
to a dead man? An? thash what I ain??s good as. Jus? a few more drinks.?

He looked a pretty robust specimen for his age, and I said so.

?Wha?s good of living blind?s a bat?? be demanded aggressively. ?Thash
what my wife said. An? she was right?only she?s more guts than I have.
When she found as the kids was blind too, what did she do? Took ?em into
our bed with her and turned on the gas. Thash what she done. An? I
hadn?t the guts to stick with ?em. She?s got pluck, my wife, more?n I
have. But I will have soon. I?m goin? back up there soon? when I?m drunk
enough.?


What was there to say? What I did say served no purpose, save to spoil
his temper. In the end he groped his way to the stairs and disappeared
up them, bottle in hand. I didn?t try to stop him or follow him. I
watched him go. Then I knocked off the last of my brandy and went out
into the silent street.




        II
        THE COMING OF THE TRIFFIDS



This is a personal record. It involves a great deal that has vanished
forever, but I can?t tell it in any other way than by using the words we
used to use for those vanished things, so they have to stand. But even
to make the setting intelligible I find that I shall have to go back
farther than the point at which I started.


When I, William Masen, was a child we lived, my father, my mother, and
myself, in a southern suburb of London. We had a small house which my
father supported by conscientious daily ?attendance at his desk in the
Inland Revenue Department, and a small garden at which he worked rather
harder during the summer. There was not a lot to distinguish us from the
ten or twelve million other people who used to live in and around London
in those days.

My father was one of those persons who could add a column of
figures?even of the ridiculous coinage then in use locally?with a flick
of the eye, so that it was natural for him to have in mind that I should
become an accountant. As a result, my inability to make any column of
figures reach the same total twice caused me to be something of a
mystery as well as a disappointment to him. Still, there it was: just
one of those things. And each of a succession of teachers who tried to
show me that mathematical answers were derived logically and not through
some form of esoteric inspiration was forced to give up with the
assurance that I had no head for figures. My father ?would read my
school reports with a gloom which in other respects they scarcely
warranted. His mind worked, I think, this way: no head for figures = no
idea of finance = no money.

?I really don?t know what we shall do with you. What do you /want /to
do?? he would ask.

And until I was thirteen or fourteen T would shake my head, conscious of
my sad inadequacy, and admit that I did not know.

It was the appearance of the triffids which really decided the matter
for us. Indeed, they did a lot more than that for me. They provided me
with a job and comfortably supported me. They also on several occasions
almost took my life. On the other hand, I have to admit that they
preserved it, too, for it was a triffid sting that had landed me in
hospital on the critical occasion of the ?comet debris.?

In the books there is quite a lot of loose speculation on the sudden
occurrence of the triffids. Most of it is nonsense. Certainly they were
not spontaneously generated, as many simple souls believed. Nor did most
people endorse the theory that they were a kind of sample
visitation?harbingers of worse to come if the world did not mend its
ways and behave its troublesome self. Nor did their seeds float to us
through space as specimens of the horrid forms fife might assume upon
other, less favored worlds?at least I am satisfied that they did not.

I learned more about it than most people because triffids were my job,
and the firm I worked for was intimately, if not very gracefully,
concerned in their public appearance. Nevertheless, their true origin
still remains obscure. My own belief, for what that is worth, is that
they were the outcome of a series of ingenious biological meddlings?and
very likely accidental, at that. Had they been evolved anywhere but in
the region they were, we should doubtless have had a well-documented
ancestry for them. As it was, no authoritative statement was ever
published by those who must have been best qualified to know. The reason
for this lay, no doubt, in the curious political conditions then prevailing.

The world we lived in was wide, and most of it was open to us with
little trouble. Roads, railways, and shipping lines laced it, ready to
carry one thousands of miles safely and in comfort. If we wanted to
travel more swiftly still, and could afford it, we traveled by airplane.
There was no need for anyone to take weapons or even precautions in
those days. You could go just as you were to wherever you wished, with
nothing to hinder you?other than a lot of forms and regulations. A world
so tamed sounds utopian now. Nevertheless, it was so over five sixths of
the globe?though the remaining sixth was something different again.


It must be difficult for young people who never knew it to envisage a
world like that. Perhaps it sounds like a golden age?though it wasn?t
quite that to those who lived in it. Or they may think that an Earth
ordered and cultivated almost all over sounds dull?but it wasn?t that,
either. It was rather an exciting place-?for a biologist, anyway. Every
year we were pushing the northern limit of growth for food plants a
little farther back. New fields were growing quick crops on what had
historically been simply tundra or barren land. Every season, too,
stretches of desert both old and recent were reclaimed and made to grow
grass or food. For food was then our most pressing problem, and the
progress of the regeneration schemes, and the advance of the cultivation
lines on the maps, was followed with almost as much attention as an
earlier generation had paid to battle fronts.

Such a swerve of interest from swords to plowshares was undoubtedly a
social improvement, but, at the same time, it was a mistake for the
optimistic to claim it as showing a change in the human spirit. The
human spirit continued much as before?95 per cent of it wanting to live
in peace, and the other S per cent considering its chances if it should
risk starting anything. It was chiefly because no one?s chances looked
too good that the lull continued.

Meanwhile, with something like twenty-five million new mouths bawling
for food every year, the supply problem became steadily worse, and after
years of ineffective propaganda a couple of atrocious harvests had at
last made the people aware of its urgency.

The factor which had caused the militant 5 per cent to relax awhile from
fomenting discord was the satellites. Sustained research in rocketry had
at last succeeded in attaining one of its objectives. It had sent up a
missile which stayed up. It was, in fact, possible to fire a rocket far
enough up for it to fall into an orbit. Once there, it would continue to
circle like a tiny moon, quite inactive and innocuous until the pressure
on a button should give it the impulse to drop back, with devastating
effect.

Great as was the public concern which followed the triumphant
announcement of the first nation to establish a satellite weapon
satisfactorily, a still greater concern was felt over the failure of
others to make any announcement at all, even when they were known to
have had similar successes. It was by no means pleasant to realize that
there was an unknown number of menaces up there over your head, quietly
circling and circling until someone should arrange for them to drop?and
that there was nothing to be done about them. Still, life has to go
on?and novelty is a wonderfully short-lived thing. One became used to
the idea perforce. From time to time there would be a panicky flare-up
of expostulation when reports circulated that as well as satellites with
atomic heads there were others with such things as crop diseases, cattle
diseases, radioactive dusts, viruses, and infections not only of
familiar kinds but brand-new sorts recently thought up in laboratories,
all floating around up there. Whether such uncertain and potentially
backfiring weapons had actually been placed is hard to say. But then the
limits of folly itself?particularly of folly with fear on its heels? are
not easy to define, either. A virulent organism, unstable enough to
become harmless in the course of a few days (and who is to say that such
could not be bred?), could be considered to have strategic uses if
dropped in suitable spots.


At least the United States Government took the suggestion seriously
enough to deny emphatically that it controlled any satellites designed
to conduct biological warfare directly upon human beings. One or two
minor nations, whom no one suspected of controlling any satellites at
all, hastened to make similar declarations. Other, and major, powers did
not, In the face of this ominous reticence, the public began demanding
to know why the United States had neglected to prepare for a form of
warfare which others were ready to use?and just what did ?directly?
mean. At this point all parties tacitly gave up denying or confirming
anything about satellites, and an intensified effort was made to divert
the public interest to the no less important, but far less acrimonious,
matter of food scarcity.

The laws of supply and demand should have enabled the more enterprising
to organize commodity monopolies, but the world at large had become
antagonistic to declared monopolies. The interlaced-company system,
however, really worked very smoothly without anything so imputable as
Articles of Federation. The general public heard scarcely anything of
such little difficulties within the pattern as had to he unsnarled from
time to time. Hardly anyone heard of even the existence of one Umberto
Christoforo Palanguez, for instance. I heard of him myself only years
later in the course of my work.

Umberto was of assorted Latin descent, and by profession a pilot. His
first appearance as a possibly disruptive spanner in the neat machinery
of the edible-oil interests occurred when he walked into the offices of
the Arctic &


European Fish Oil Company and produced a bottle of pale pink oil in
which he proposed to interest them.

Arctic & European analyzed the sample. The first thing they discovered
about it was that it was not a fish oil: it was vegetable, though they
could not identify the source. The second revelation was that it made
most of their best fish oils look like grease-box fillers.

Alarmed at the effect this potent oil would have on their trade, Arctic
& European summoned Umberto and questioned him at length. He was not
communicative. He told them that the oil came from Russia (which still
hid behind a curtain of suspicion and secrecy) and that for an enormous
sum of money he would endeavor to fly out the seeds. Terms were agreed
on, and then Umberto vanished.

Arctic & European had not at first connected the appearance of the
triffids with Umberto, and the police of several countries went on
keeping an eye open for him on the company?s behalf for several years.
It was not until some investigator produced a specimen of triffid oil
for their inspection that they realized that it corresponded exactly
with the sam-pie Umberso had shown them, and that it was the seeds of

the triffid be had set out to bring.

What happened to Umberto himself will never be definitely known. It is
my guess that over the Pacific Ocean, somewhere high up in the
stratosphere, he found himself attacked by Russian planes. It may be
that the first he knew of it was when cannon shells from Russian
fighters started to break up his craft.

Perhaps Umberto?s plane exploded, perhaps it just fell to pieces.
Whichever it was, I am sure that when the fragments began their long,
long fall toward the sea they left behind them something which looked at
first like a white vapor.

It was not vapor. It was a cloud of seeds, floating, so infinitely light
they were, even in the rarefied air. Millions of gossamer-slung triffid
seeds, free now to drift wherever the winds of the world should take them.

It might be weeks, perhaps months, before they would sink to Earth at
last, many of them thousands of miles from their starting place.

That is, I repeat, conjecture. But I cannot see a more probable way in
which that plant, intended to be kept secret, could come, quite
suddenly, to be found in almost every part of the world.


My introduction to a triffid came early. It so happened that we had one
of the first in the locality growing in our own garden. The plant was
quite well developed before any of us bothered to notice it, for it had
taken root along with a number of other casuals behind the bit of hedge
that screened the rubbish heap. It wasn?t doing any harm there, and it
wasn?t in anyone?s way. So when we did notice it later on, we?d just
take a look at it now and then to see how it was getting along, and let
it be.

However, a triffid is certainly distinctive, and we couldn?t help
getting a bit curious about it after a time. Not, perhaps, very
actively, for there are always a few unfamiliar things that somehow or
other manage to lodge in the neglected corners of a garden, but enough
to mention to one another that it was beginning to look a pretty queer
sort of thing.

Nowadays, when everyone knows only too well what a triffid looks like,
it is difficult to recall how odd and somehow /foreign /the first ones
appeared to us. Nobody, as far as I know, felt any misgiving or alarm
about them then. I imagine that most people thought of them?when they
thought of them at all?in much the same way that my father did.

I have a picture in my memory now of him examining ours and puzzling
over it at a time when it must have been about a year old. In almost
every detail it was a half-size replica of a fully grown triffid?only it
didn?t have a name yet, and no one had seen one fully grown. My father
leaned over, peering at it through his horn-rimmed gasses, fingering its
stalk, and blowing gently through his gingery mustache, as was his habit
when thoughtful. He inspected the straight stem, and the woody bole from
which it sprang. He gave curious, if not very penetrative, attention to
the three small, bare sticks which grew straight up beside the stem. He
smoothed the short sprays of leathery green leaves between his finger
and thumb as if their texture might tell him something. Then he peered
into the curious, funnel-like formation at the top of the stem, still
puffing reflectively, but inconclusively, through his mustache. I
remember the first time he lifted me up to look inside that conical cup
and see the tightly wrapped whorl within, It looked not unlike the new,
close-rolled frond of a fern, emerging a couple of inches from a sticky
mess in the base of the cup. I did not touch it, but I knew the stuff
must be sticky because there were flies and other small insects
struggling in it.

More than once my father ruminated that it was pretty queer, and
observed that one of these days he really must try to find out what it
was. I don?t think he ever made the effort, nor, at that stage, was he
likely to have learned much if he had tried.

The thing would be about four feet high then. There must have been
plenty of them about, growing tip quietly and inoffensively, with nobody
taking any particular notice of them at least it seemed so, for if the
biological or botanical experts were excited over them, no news of their
interest percolated to the general public. And so the one in our garden
continued its growth peacefully, as did thousands like it in neglected
spots all over the world.

It was some little time later that the first one picked up its roots and
walked.

That improbable achievement must, of course, have been known for some
time in Russia, where it was doubtless classified as a state secret,
but, as far as I have been able to confirm, its first occurrence in the
outside world took place in Indo-China?which meant that people went on
taking practically no notice. Indo-China was one of these regions from
which such curious and unlikely yarns might be expected to drift in, and
frequently did?the kind of thing an editor might conceivably use if news
were scarce and a touch of the ?mysterious East? would liven the paper
up a bit. But in any case the Indo-Chinese specimen can have had no
great lead. Within a few weeks reports of walking plants were pouring in
from Sumatra, Borneo, Belgian Congo, Colombia, Brazil, and most places
in the neighborhood of the equator.

This time they got into print, all right. But the much-handled stories,
written up with that blend of cautiously defensive frivolity which the
press habitually employed to cover themselves in matters regarding sea
serpents, flying saucers, thought transference, and other irregular
phenomena, prevented anyone from realizing that these accomplished
plants at all resembled the quiet, respectable weed beside our rubbish
heap. Not until the pictures began to appear did we realize that they
were identical with it save in size.

The newsreel men were quickly off the mark. Possibly they got some good
and interesting pictures for their trouble of flying to outlandish
places. but there was a current theory among cutters that more than a
few seconds of any one news subject?except a boxing match?could not fail
to paralyze an audience with boredom. My first view, therefore, of a
development which was to play such an important part in my future, as
well as in so many other people?s, was a glimpse sandwiched between a
hula contest in Honolulu and the First Lady launching a battleship. (No,
that is no anachronism.)

/  /


They were still building them: even admirals have to live.) I was
permitted to see a few triffids sway across the screen to the kind of
accompaniment supposed to be on the level of the great movie-going public:

?And now, folks, get a load of what our cameraman found in Ecuador.
Vegetables on vacation! /You?ve /only seen this kind of thing after a
party, but down in sunny Ecuador they see it any time?and no hangover to
follow! Monster plants on the march! Say, now, that?s given me a big
idea! Maybe if we can educate our potatoes right we can fix it so
they?ll walk right into the pot. How?d that be, Momma??

For the short time the scene was on I stared at it, fascinated. There
was our mysterious rubbish-heap plant grown to a height of seven feet or
more. There was no mistaking it and it was ?walking?!  


The bole, which I now saw for the first time, was shaggy with little
rootlet hairs, It would have been almost spherical but for three bluntly
tapered projections extending from the lower part. Supported on these,
the main body was lifted about a foot clear of the ground.

When it ?walked? it moved rather like a man on crutches. Two of the
blunt ?legs? slid forward, then the whole thing lurched as the rear one
drew almost level with them, then the two in front slid forward again.
At each ?step? the long stem whipped violently back and forth; it gave
one a kind of seasick feeling to watch it. As a method of progress it
looked both strenuous and clumsy?faintly reminiscent of young elephants
at play. One felt that if it were to go on lurching for long in that
fashion it would be bound to strip all its leaves if it did not actually
break its stem. Nevertheless, ungainly though it looked, it was
contriving to cover the round at something like an average walking pace.

That was about all I had time to see before the battleship launching
began. It was not a lot, but it was enough to incite an investigating
spirit in a boy. For if that thing in Ecuador could do a trick like
that, why not the one in our garden? Admittedly ours was a good deal
smaller, but it did /look /the same.

About ten minutes after I got home I was digging round our triffid.
carefully loosening the earth near it to encourage it to ?walk.?

Unfortunately there was an aspect of this self-propelled plant discovery
which the newsreel people either had not experienced or had chosen for
some reason of their own not to reveal. There was no warning, either. I
was bending down, intent on clearing the earth without harming the
plant, when something from nowhere hit me one terrific slam and knocked
me out...

I woke up to find myself in bed, with my mother, my father, and the
doctor watching me anxiously. My head felt as if it were split open. I
was aching all over, and, as I later discovered, one side of my face was
decorated with a blotchy red raised weal, The insistent questions as to
how I came to be lying unconscious in the garden were quite useless; I
had no faintest idea what it was that had hit mc. And some little time
passed before I learned that I must have been one of the first persons
in England to be stung by a triffid and get away with it. The triffid
was, of course, immature. But before I had fully recovered my father bad
found out what had undoubtedly happened to me, and by the time I went
into the garden again he had wreaked stern vengeance on our triffid and
disposed of the remains on a bonfire.


Now that walking plants were established facts, the press lost its
former tepidity and bathed them in publicity. So a name had to be found
for them. Already there were botanists wallowing, after their custom, in
polysyllabic dog Latin and Greek to produce variants on /ambulans/ and
/pseudopodia, /but what the newspapers and the public wanted was
something easy on the tongue and not too heavy on the headlines for
general use. If you could see the papers of that time you would find
them referring to:


TRICHOTS           TRINITS

TRICUSPS           TRIPEDALS

TRIGENATES         TRIPEDS

TRIGONS            TRIQUETS

TRILOGS            TRIPODS

TRIDENTATES        TRIPPETS


and a number of other mysterious things not even beginning with
?tri??though almost all centered on the feature of that active,
three-pronged root.

There was argument, public, private, and bar-parlor, with heated
championship of one term or another on near-scientific,
quasi-etymological, and a number of other grounds, but gradually one
term began to dominate this philological gymkhana, in its first form it
was not quite acceptable, but common usage modified the original lone
first ?i,? and custom quickly wrote in a second ?f,? to leave no doubt
about it.


 And so emerged the standard term. A catchy little name originating in
some newspaper office as a handy label for an oddity?but destined one
day to be associated with pain, fear, and misery?TRIFFID. ...

The first wave of public interest soon ebbed away. Triffids were,
admittedly, a bit weird?but that was, after all, just because they were
a novelty. People had felt the same about novelties of other days: about
kangaroos, giant lizards, black swans. And when you came to think of it,
were triffids all that much queerer than mudfish, ostriches, polliwogs,
and a hundred other things? The bar was an animal that had learned to
fly; well, here was a plant that had learned to walk?what of that?

But there were features of it to be less casually dismissed. On its
origins the Russians, true to type, lay low and said nothing. Even those
who had heard of Umberto did not yet connect him with it. Its sudden
appearance, and, even more, its wide distribution, promoted very puzzled
speculation. For though it matured more rapidly in the tropics,
specimens in various stages of development were reported from almost any
region outside the polar circles and the deserts.

People were surprised, and a little disgusted, to learn that the species
was carnivorous, and that the flies and other insects caught in the cups
were actually digested by the sticky substance there. We in temperate
zones were not ignorant of insectivorous plants, but we were
unaccustomed to finding them outside special hothouses, and apt to
consider them as in some way slightly indecent, or at least improper.
But actually alarming was the discovery that the whorl topping a
triffid?s stem could lash out as a slender stinging weapon ten feet
long, capable of discharging enough poison to kill a man if it struck
squarely on his unprotected skin.

As soon as this danger was appreciated there followed a nervous smashing
and chopping of triffids everywhere, until it occurred to someone that
all that was necessary to make them harmless was the removal of the
actual stinging weapon. At this, the slightly hysterical assault upon
the plants declined, with their numbers considerably thinned. A little
later it began to be a fashion to have a safely docked triffid or two
about one?s garden. It was found that it took about two years for the
lost sting to be dangerously replaced, so that an annual pruning assured
that they were in a state of safety where they could provide vast
amusement for the children.

In temperate countries, where man had succeeded in putting most forms of
nature save his own under a reasonable degree of restraint, the status
of the triffid was thus made quite clear. But in the tropics,
particularly in the dense forest areas, they quickly became a scourge.

The traveler very easily failed to notice one among the normal bushes
and undergrowth, and the moment he was in range the venomous sting would
slash out. Even the regular inhabitant of such a district found it
difficult to detect a motionless triffid cunningly lurking beside a
jungle path. They were uncannily sensitive to any movement near them,
and hard to take unawares.

Dealing with them became a serious problem in such regions. The most
favored method was to shoot the top off the stem, and the sting with it.
The jungle natives took to carrying long, light poles mounted with
hooked knives, which they used effectively if they could get their blows
in first? but not at all if the triffid had a chance to sway forward and
increase its range by an unexpected four or five feet. Before long,
however, these pike like devices were mostly superseded by
spring-operated guns of various types. Most of them shot spinning disks,
crosses, or small boomerangs of thin steel. As a rule they were
inaccurate above about twelve yards, though capable of slicing a triffid
stern neatly at twenty-five if they hit it. Their invention pleased both
the authorities?who had an almost unanimous distaste for the
indiscriminate toting of rifles?and the users, who found the missiles of
razor-blade steel f at cheaper and lighter than cartridges, and
admirably adaptable to silent banditry.

Elsewhere, immense research into the nature, habits, and constitution of
the triffid went on. Earnest experimenters set out to determine, in the
interests of science, how far and for how long it could walk; whether it
could be said to have a front, or could perform its march in any
direction with equal clumsiness; what proportion of its rime it must
spend with its roots in the ground; what reactions it showed to the
presence of various chemicals in the soil; and a vast quantity of other
questions, both useful and useless.

The largest specimen ever observed in the tropics stood nearly ten feet
high. No European specimen over eight feet had been seen, and the
average was little over seven. They appeared to adapt easily to a wide
range of climate and soils. They had, it seemed, no natural
enemies?other than man.


But there were a number of not unobvious characteristics which escaped
comment for some little time. It was, for instance, quite a while before
anyone drew attention to the uncanny accuracy with which they aimed
their stings, and that they almost invariably struck for the head. Nor
did anyone at first take notice of their habit of lurking near their
fallen victims. The reason for that became clear only when it was shown
that they fed upon flesh as well as upon insects. The stinging tendril
did not have the muscular power to tear firm flesh, but it had strength
enough to pull shreds from a decomposing body and lift them to the cup
on its stem.

There was no great interest, either, in the three little leafless sticks
at the base of the stem. There was a light notion that they might have
something to do with the reproductive system?that system which tends to
be a sort of botanical glory-hole for all parts of doubtful purpose
until they can be sorted out and more specifically assigned later on. It
was assumed, consequently, that their characteristic of suddenly losing
their immobility and rattling a rapid tattoo against the main stem was
some strange form of triffidian amatory exuberance.


Possibly my uncomfortable distinction of getting myself stung so early
in the triffid era had the effect of stimulating my interest, for I
seemed to have a sort of link with them from then on. I spent?or
?wasted,? if you look at me through my father?s eyes?a great deal of
fascinated time watching them.

One could not blame him for considering this a worthless pursuit, yet
later the time turned out to have been better employed than either of us
suspected, for it was just before I left school that the Attic &
European Fish Oil Company reconstituted itself, dropping the word ?Fish?
in the process. The public learned that it and similar companies in
other countries were about to farm triffids on a large scale, in order
to extract valuable oils and juices and to press highly nutritious oil
cake for stock feeding. Consequently, triffids moved into the realm of
big business overnight.

Right away I decided my future. I applied to the Arctic & European,
where my qualifications got me a job on the production side. My father?s
disapproval was somewhat qualified by the rate of pay, which was good
for my age. But when I spoke enthusiastically of the future he blew
doubtfully through his mustache. He had real faith only in a type of
work steadied by long tradition, but he let me have my way. ?After all,
if the thing isn?t a success, you?ll find out young enough to start in
on something more solid,? he conceded.

There turned out to be no need for that. Before he and my mother were
killed together in a holiday airbus crash five years later, they had
seen [he new companies drive all competing oils off the market and those
of us who had been in at the beginning apparently well set for life.

One of the early corners was my friend Walter Lucknor. There had been
some doubt at first about taking Walter on. He knew little of
agriculture, less of business, and lacked the qualifications for lab
work. On the other hand, he did know a lot about triffids?he had a kind
of inspired knack with them.

What happened to Walter that fatal May years later I do not know?though
I can guess. It is a sad thing that he did not escape. He might have
been immensely valuable later on. I don?t think anybody really
understands triffids, or ever will, but Walter came nearer to beginning
to understand them than any man I have known. Or should I say that he
was given to intuitive feelings about them?

It was a year or two after the job had begun that he first surprised me.

The sun was close to setting. We had knocked off for the day and were
looking with a sense of satisfaction at three new fields of nearly fully
grown triffids. In those days we didn?t simply corral them as we did
later. They were arranged across the fields roughly in rows?at least the
steel stakes to which each was tethered by a chain were in rows, though
the plants themselves had no sense of tidy regimentation. We reckoned
that in another month or so we?d be able to start tapping them for
juice. The evening was peaceful; almost the only sounds that broke it
were the occasional rattlings of the triffids? little sticks against
their stems. Walter regarded them with his head slightly on one side. He
removed his pipe.

?They?re talkative tonight,? he observed.

I took that as anyone else would, metaphorically.

?Maybe it?s the weather,? I suggested ?I fancy they do it more when it?s
dry.?

He looked sidelong at me, with a smile.

?Do you talk more when it?s dry??

?Why should?? I began, and then broke off. ?You don?t really mean you
think they?re talking?? I said, noticing his expression.

?Well, why not??

?But it?s absurd. Plants talking!?

?So much more absurd than plants walking?? he asked.

I stared at them, and then back at him.

?I never thought?? I began doubtfully.


 ?You try thinking of it a bit, and watching them. I?d be interested to
hear your conclusions,? he said.

It was a curious thing that in all my dealings with triffids such a
possibility had never occurred to me. Pd been prejudiced, I suppose. by
the love-call theory. But once he had put the idea into my mind, it
stuck. I couldn?t get away from the feeling that they might indeed be
rattling out secret messages to one another.

Up to then I?d fancied I?d watched triffids pretty closely, but when
Walter was talking about them I felt that Ed noticed practically
nothing. He could, when he was in the mood, talk on about them for
hours, advancing theories that were sometimes wild but sometimes not
impossible.

The public had by this time grown out of thinking triffids freakish.
They were clumsily amusing, but not greatly interesting. The company
found them interesting, however, It took the view that their existence
was a piece of benevolence for everyone particularly for itself. Walter
shared neither view. At times, listening to him, I began to have some
misgivings myself.

He bad become quite certain that they ?talked,?

?And that,? he argued, ?means that somewhere in them is intelligence. It
can?t be seated in a brain, because dissection shows nothing like a
brain?but that doesn?t prove there isn?t something there that does a
brain?s job.

?And there?s certainly intelligence there, of a kind. Have you noticed
that when they attack they always go for the unprotected parts? Almost
always the head?but sometimes the hands. And another thing: if you look
at the statistics of casualties, just take notice of the proportion that
has been stung across the eyes and blinded. It?s remarkable?and
significant.?

?Of what?? I asked.

?Of the fact that they know what is the surest way to put a man out of
action?in other words, they know what they?re doing. Look at it this
way. Granted that they do have intelligence; then that would leave us
with only one important superiority?sight. We can see, and they can?t.
Take away our vision, and the superiority is gone. Worse than that? our
position becomes inferior to theirs, because they are adapted to a
sightless existence and we are not.?

?But even if that were so, they can?t do things. They can?t handle
things. There?s very little muscular strength in that sting lash,? I
pointed out,

?True, but what?s the good of our ability to handle things if we can?t
see what to do with them? Anyway, they don?t need to handle things?not
in the way we do. They can get their nourishment direct from the soil,
or from insects and bits of raw meat. They don?t have to go through all
the complicated business of growing things, distributing them, and
usually cooking them as well. In fact, if it were a choice for survival
between a triffid and a blind man, I know which I?d put my money on.

?You?re assuming equal intelligence,? I said.

?Not at all. I don?t need to. I should imagine it?s likely to be an
altogether different type of intelligence, U only because their needs
are so much simpler. Look at the complex processes we have to use to get
an assimilable extract from a triffid. Now reverse that. What does the
triffid have to do? Just sting us, wait a few days. and then begin to
assimilate us. The simple, natural course of things

He would go on like that by the hour until listening to him would have
me getting things out of proportion and I?d find myself thinking of the
triffids as though they were some kind of competitor. Walter himself
never pretended to think otherwise. He had, he admitted, thought of
writing a book on that very aspect of the subject when he had gathered
more material.

?Had?? I repeated. ?What?s stopping you??

?Just this.? He waved his hand to include the farm generally. ?It?s a
vested interest now. It wouldn?t pay anyone to put out disturbing
thoughts about it. Anyway, we have the triffids controlled well enough
so it?s an academic point and scarcely worth raising.

?I never can be quite sure with you,? I told him. ?I?m never certain how
far you are serious and how far beyond your facts you allow your
imagination to lead you. Do you honestly think there is a danger in the
things??

He puffed a bit at his pipe before he answered.

?That?s fair enough he admitted. Because ? well, I?m by no means sure
myself. But I?m pretty certain of one thing and that is that there
/could/ be danger in them. I?d feel a lot nearer giving you a real
answer if I could get a line on what it means when they patter. Somehow
I don?t care for that. There they sit, with everyone thinking no more of
them than they might of a pretty odd lot or cabbages, yet half the dine
they?re pattering and clattering away at one another, Why? What is it
they patter about? That?s what I want to know.?

I think Walter rarely gave a hint of his ideas to anyone else, and I
kept them confidential, partly because I knew no one who wouldn?t be
more skeptical than I was myself and partly because it wouldn?t do
either of us any good to get a reputation in the firm as crackpots.

For a year or so more we were working fairly close together. But with
the opening of new nurseries and the need for studying methods abroad, I
began to travel a lot. He gave up the field work and went into the
research department. It suited him there, doing his own searching as
well as the company?s I used to drop in to see him from time to time. He
was forever making experiments with his triffids, but the results
weren?t clearing his general ideas as much as he had hoped. He had
proved to*/ /*his own satisfaction at least, the existence of a
well-developed intelligence and even I had to admit that his results
seemed to show something more than instinct. He was still convinced that
the pattering of the sticks was a form or communication. For public
consumption he had shown that the sticks were something more, and that a
triffid deprived of them gradually deteriorated. He had also established
that the infertility rate of triffid seeds was something like 95 per cent.

?Which.? he remarked. ?is a damned good thing. If they all germinated,
there?d soon be standing room only, for triffids only, on this planet.?

With that, too, I agreed. Triffid-seed time was quite* a *sight. The
dark green pod just below the cup was glistening and distended, about
half as big again as large apple? When it burst, it did it with a pop
that was audible twenty yards away. The white seeds shot into the air
like steam and began drifting away on the lightest of breezes. Looking
down on a field of triffids late in August, you could well get the idea
that some kind of desultory bombardment was going on.

It was Walter?s discovery again that the quality of the extracts was
improved if the plants retained their stings. In consequence, the
practice of docking was discontinued on farms throughout the trade, and
we had to wear protective devices when working among the plants.

At the time or the accident that had landed me in hospital I was
actually with Walter. We were examining some specimens which were
showing unusual deviations. Both of us were wearing wire-mesh masks. I
did not see exactly what happened. All I know is that as I bent forward
a sting slashed viciously at my face and smacked against the wire of the
mask. Ninety-nine times in a hundred it would not have mattered; that
was what the masks were for. But this one came with such force that some
of the little poison sacs were burst open, and a few drops from them
went into my eyes. Walter got me back into his lab and administered the
antidote in a few seconds. It was entirely due to his quick work that
they had the chance of saving my sight at all. But even so it had meant
over a week in bed, in the dark.

While I lay there I had quite decided that when?and if? I had my sight
back I was going to apply for a transfer to another side of the
business. And if that did not go through, I?d quit the job altogether.

I had built up a considerable resistance to triffid poison since my
first sting in the garden. I could take, and had taken, without very
much harm, stings which would have laid an inexperienced man out very
cold indeed. But an old saying about a pitcher and a well kept on
recurring to me. I was taking my warning.

I spent, I remember, a good many of my enforcedly dark hours deciding
what kind of job I would try for if they would not give me that transfer.

Considering what was just around the corner for us all, I could scarcely
have found a contemplation more idle.




        III
        THE GROPING CITY



 I left the pub door swinging behind me as I made my way to the corner
of the main road. There I hesitated.

To the left, through miles of suburban streets, lay the open county; to
the right, the West End of London, with the City beyond. I was feeling
somewhat restored, but curiously detached now, and rudderless. I had no
glimmering of a plan, and in the face of what I had at last begun to
perceive as a vast and not merely local catastrophe, if was still too
stunned to begin to reason one out. What plan could there be to deal
with such a thing? I felt forlorn, cast into desolation, and yet not
quite real, not quite myself here and now. In no direction was there any
traffic, nor any sound of it. The only signs of life were a few people
here and there cautiously groping their way along the shop fronts.

The day was perfect for early summer. The sun poured down from a deep
blue sky set with tufts of white woolly clouds. All of it was clean and
fresh save for a smear made by a single column of greasy smoke coming
from somewhere behind the houses to the north.

I stood there indecisively for a few minutes. Then I turned east,
Londonward.

To this day I cannot say quite why. Perhaps it was an instinct to seek
familiar places, or the feeling that if there were authority anywhere it
must be somewhere in that direction.

The brandy had made me feel more hungry than ever, but I did not find
the problem of feeding as easy to deal with as it should have been. And
yet there were the shops, untenanted and unguarded, with food in the
windows?and here was I, with hunger and the means to pay. Or, if I did
not wish to pay, I had only to smash a window and take what I wanted.

Nevertheless, it was hard to persuade oneself to do that. I was not yet
ready to admit, after nearly thirty years of a reasonably
right-respecting existence and law-abiding life, that things had changed
in any fundamental way. There was, too, a feeling that as long as I
remained /my /normal self things might even yet, in some inconceivable
way, return to /their /normal, Absurd it undoubtedly was, but I had a
very strong sense that the moment I should stove in one of those sheets
of plate glass I would leave the old order behind me forever: I should
become a looter, a sacker, a low scavenger upon the dead body of the
system that had nourished me. Such a foolish niceness of sensibility in
a stricken world! And yet it still pleases me to remember that civilized
usage did not slide off me at once, and that for a time, at least, I
wandered along past displays which made my mouth water while my already
obsolete conventions kept me hungry.

The problem resolved itself in a sophistical way after perhaps half a
mile. A taxi, after mounting the sidewalk, had finished up with its
radiator buried in a pile of delicatessen. That made it seem different
from doing my own breaking in. I climbed past the taxi and collected the
makings of a good meal. But even then something of the old standards
still clung:

I conscientiously left a fair price for what I had taken lying on the
counter.

Almost across the road there was a garden. It was the kind that had once
been the graveyard of a vanished church. The old headstones had been
taken up and set back against the surrounding brick wall, the cleared
space turfed over and laid out with graveled paths. It looked pleasant
under the freshly leafed trees, and to one of the seats there I took my
lunch.

The place was withdrawn and peaceful. No one else came in, though
occasionally a figure would shuffle past the railings at the entrance. I
threw some crumbs to a few sparrows, the first birds I had seen that
day, and felt all the better for watching their perky indifference to
calamity.

When I had finished eating I lit a cigarette. While I sat there smoking
it, wondering where I should go and what I should do, the quiet was
broken by the sound of a piano played somewhere in a block of apartments
that overlooked the garden. Presently a girl?s voice began to sing. The
song was Byron?s ballad;


/So we?ll go no more a-roving/

/So late into the night,/

/Though the heart be still as loving,/

/And the moon be still as bright./


/For the sword outwears its sheath,/

/And the soul wears out the breast./

/And the heart must pause to breathe,/

/And love itself have rest./


/Though the night was made for loving,/

/Arid the day returns too soon,/

/Yet we?ll go no more a-roving/

/By the light of the moon./


I listened, looking up at the pattern that the tender young leaves and
the branches made against the fresh blue sky. The song finished. The
notes of the piano died away. Then there was a sound of sobbing. No
passion: softly, helplessly, forlorn, heartbroken. Who she was, whether
it was the singer or another weeping her hopes away, I do not know. But
to listen longer was more than I could endure. I went quietly back into
the street, unable to see anything more than mistily for a while.


Even Hyde Park Corner, when I reached it, was almost deserted. A few
derelict cars and trucks stood about on the roads. Very little, it
seemed, had gone out of control when it was in motion. One bus had run
across the path and come to rest in the Green Park; a runaway horse with
shafts still attached to it lay beside the artillery memorial against
which it had cracked its skull. The only moving things were a few men
and a lesser number of women feeling their way carefully with hands and
feet where there were railings and shuffling forward with protectively
outstretched arms where there were not. Also, and rather unexpectedly,
there were one or two cats, apparently intact visually and treating the
whole situation with that self-possession common to cats. They had poor
prowling through the eerie quietness?the sparrows were few, and the
pigeons had vanished.

Still magnetically drawn toward the old center of things, I crossed in
the direction of Piccadilly. I was just about to start along it when I
noticed a sharp new sound?a steady tapping not far away, and coming
closer. Looking up Park Lane, I discovered its source. A man, more
neatly dressed than any other I had seen that morning, was walking
rapidly toward me, hitting the wall beside him with a white stick. As he
caught the sound of my steps he stopped, listening alertly.

?It?s all right,? I told him. ?Come on.?

I felt relieved to see him. He was, so to speak, normally blind. His
dark glasses were much less disturbing than the staring but useless eyes
of the others.

?Stand still, then,? he said. ?I?ve already been bumped into by God
knows how many fools today. What the devil?s happened? Why is it so
quiet? I know it isn?t night?I can feel the sunlight. What?s gone wrong
with everything??

I told him as much as I knew of what had happened.

When I had finished he said nothing for almost a minute, then he gave a
short, bitter laugh.

?There?s one thing,? he said. ?They?ll be needing all their damned
patronage for themselves now.?

With that he straightened up, a little defiantly.

?Thank you. Good luck,? he said to me, and set off westward wearing an
exaggerated air of independence.

The sound of his briskly confident tapping gradually died away behind me
as I made my way up Piccadilly.

There were more people to be seen now, and I walked among the scatter of
stranded vehicles in the road. Out there I was much less disturbing to
those who were feeling their way along the fronts of the buildings, for
every time they heard a step close by they would stop and brace
themselves against a possible collision. Such collisions were taking
place every now and then all down the street, but there was one that I
found significant. The subjects of it had been groping along a shop
front from opposite directions until they met with a bump. One was a
young man in a well-cut suit, but wearing a tie obviously selected by
touch alone; the other, a woman who carried a small child. The child
whined something in-audible.


The young man had started to edge his way past the woman. He stopped
abruptly.

?Wait a minute,? he said. ?Can your child see??

?Yes,? she said. ?But I can?t.?

The young man turned. He put one finger on the plate glass window, pointing.

?Look, Sonny, what?s in there?? he asked.

?Not Sonny,? the child objected.

?Go on, Mary. Tell the gentleman,? her mother encouraged her.

?Pretty ladies,? said the child.

The man took the woman by the arm and felt his way to the next window.

?And what?s in here?? he asked again.

?Apples and fings,? the child told him.

?Fine!? said the young man.

He pulled off his shoe and hit the window a smart smack with the heel of
it. He was inexperienced; the first blow did not do it, but the second
did. The crash reverberated up and down the street. He restored his
shoe, put an arm cautiously through the broken window, and felt about
until he found a couple of oranges. One he gave to the woman and one to
the child. He felt about again, found one for himself, and began to peel
it. The woman fingered hers.

?But?? she began.

?What?s the matter? Don?t like oranges?? he asked.

?But it isn?t right,? she said. ?We didn?t ought to take ?em. Not like
this.?

?How else are you going to get food?? he inquired.

?I suppose?well, I don?t know,? she admitted doubtfully.

?Very well. That?s the answer. Eat it up now, and we?ll go and find
something more substantial.?

She still held the orange in her hand, head bent down as though she were
looking at it.

?All the same, it don?t seem right,? she said again, but there was less
conviction in her tone.

Presently she put the child down and began to peel the orange....


Piccadilly Circus was the most populous place I had found so far. It
seemed crowded after the rest, though there were probably less than a
hundred people there, all told. Mostly they were wearing queer,
ill-assorted clothes and were prowling restlessly around as though still
semi dazed. Occasionally a mishap would bring an outburst of profanity
and futile rage?rather alarming to hear, because it was itself the
product of fright, and childish in temper. But with one exception there
was little talk and little noise. It seemed as though their blindness
had shut people into themselves.

The exception had found himself a position out on one of the traffic
islands. He was a tall, elderly, gaunt man with a bush of wiry gray
hair, and he was holding forth emphatically about repentance, the wrath
to come, and the uncomfortable prospects for sinners. Nobody was paying
him any attention; for most of them the day of wrath had already arrived.

Then, from a distance, came a sound which caught every-ones attention: a
gradually swelling chorus:


/And when I die,/

/Don?t bury me at all,/

/Just pickle my bones/

/in alcohol./


Dreary and untuneful, it slurred through the empty streets, echoing
dismally back and forth. Every head in the Circus was turning now left,
now right, trying to place its direction. The prophet of doom raised his
voice against the competition. The song wailed discordantly closer:


/Lay a bottle of booze/

/At my head and my feet,/

/And then I?m sure/

/My bones will keep./


and as an accompaniment to it there was the shuffle of feet more or less
in step.

From where I stood I could see them come in single file out* *of a side
street into Shaftesbury Avenue and turn toward the Circus. The second
man had his hands on the shoulders of the leader, the third on his, and
so on, to the number of twenty-five or thirty. At the conclusion of that
song somebody started ?Beer, Beer, Glorious Beer!? pitching it in such a
high key that it petered out in confusion.

They trudged steadily on until they reached the center of the Circus,
then the leader raised his voice, It was a considerable voice, with
parade-ground quality:

?Companee-ee-ee?*HALT!*?


Everybody else in the Circus was now struck motionless, all with their
faces turned toward him, nil trying to guess what was afoot. The leader
raised his voice again, mimicking the manner of a professional guide:

??Ere we are, gents one an? all. Piccabloodydilly Circus. The Center of
the World. The ?Ub of the Universe. Where all the nobs had their wine,
women, and song.?

He was not blind, far from it. His eyes were ranging round, taking stock
as he spoke, His sight must have been saved by some such accident as
mine, but he was pretty drunk, and so were the men behind him.

?An? we?ll ?ave it too,? he added. ?Next stop, the well-known Caffy
Royal?an? all drinks on the house,?

?Yus?but what abaht the women?? asked a voice, and there was a laugh.

?Oh, women. ?S? that what you want?? said the leader.

He stepped forward and caught a girl by the arm. She screamed as he
dragged her toward the man who had spoken, but he took no notice of that.

?There y?are, chum. An? don?t say I don?t treat you right. It?s a peach,
a smasher?if that makes any difference to you.?

?Hey, what about mc?? said the next man.

?You, mate? Well, let?s see. Like ?em blond or dark??

Considered later, I suppose I behaved like a fool. My head was still
full of standards and conventions that had ceased to apply. It did not
occur to me that if there was to be any survival, anyone adopted by this
gang would stand a far better chance than she would on her own. Fired
with a mixture of schoolboy heroics and noble sentiments, I waded in. He
didn?t see me coming until I was quite close, and then I slogged for his
jaw. Unfortunately he was a little quicker.

When I next took an interest in things I found myself lying in the road.
The sound of the gang was diminishing into the distance, and the prophet
of doom, restored to eloquence, was sending threatful bolts of
damnation, hell-fire, and a brimstone gehenna hurtling after them.

With a bit of sense knocked into me, I became thankful that the affair
had not fallen out worse. Had the result been reversed, I could scarcely
have escaped making myself responsible for the men he had been leading.
After all, and whatever one might feel about his methods, he was the
eyes of that party, and they?d be looking to him for food as well as for
drink. And the women would go along too, on their own account as soon as
they got hungry enough. And now I came to look around me, I felt
doubtful whether any of the women hereabouts would seriously mind
anyway. What with one thing and another, it looked as if I might have
had a lucky escape from promotion to gang leadership.


   Remembering that they had been headed for the Caf Royal, I decided
to revive myself and clear my head at the Regent Palace Hotel. Others
appeared to have thought of that before me, but there were quite a lot
of bottles they had not found.
 I think it was while I was sitting there comfortably with a brandy in
front of me and a cigarette in my hand that I at last began to admit
that what I had seen was all real?and decisive. There would be no going
back?ever. It was finish to all I had known . . . .

         Perhaps it had needed that blow to drive it home. Now I came
face to face with the fact that my existence simply had no focus any
longer. My way of life, my plans, ambitions, every expectation I had
had, they were all wiped out at a stroke, along with the conditions that
had formed them. I suppose that had I had any relatives or close
attachments to mourn I should have felt suicidally derelict at that
moment but what had seemed at times a rather empty existence turned out
now to be lucky. My mother and father were dead, my one attempt to marry
had miscarried some years before, and there was no particular person
dependent on me. And, curiously, what I found that I did feel?with a
consciousness that it was against what I ought to be feeling?was release....


It wasn?t just the brandy, for it persisted. I think it may have come
from the sense of facing something quite fresh and new to me. All the
old problems, the stale ones, both personal and general, had been solved
by one mighty slash. Heaven alone knew as yet what others might
arise?and it looked as though there would be plenty of them?but they
would be /new. /I was emerging as my own master, and no longer a cog. It
might well be a world full of horrors and dangers that I should have to
face, but I could take my own steps to deal with it?I would no longer be
shoved hither and thither by forces and interests that I neither
understood nor cared about.

No, it wasn?t altogether the brandy, for even now, years afterward, I
can still feel something of it?though possibly the brandy did
oversimplify things a little just then.

Then there was, too, the little question of what to do next: how and
where to start on this new life. But I did not let that worry me a lot
for the present. I drank up and went out of the hotel to see what this
strange world had to offer.




        IV
        SHADOWS BEFORE



In order to give a reasonable berth to the Caf6 Royal mob I struck up a
side street into Soho, intending to cut back to Regent street higher up.

Perhaps hunger was driving more people out of their homes. Whatever The
reason, I found that the pans I now entered were more populous than any
I?d seen since I left the hospital. Constant collisions took place on
the sidewalks and in the narrow streets, and the confusion of those who
were trying to get along was made worse by knots of people clustering in
front of the now frequently broken shop windows. None of those who
crowded there seemed to he quite sure what kind of shop they were
facing. Some in the front sought to find out by groping for any
recognizable object; others, taking the risk of disemboweling themselves
on standing splinters of glass, more enterprisingly climbed inside.

I felt that I ought to be showing these people where to find food. But
should I? If I were to lead them to a food shop still intact, there
would be a crowd which would not only sweep the place bare in five
minutes but would crush a number of its weaker members in the process.
Soon, anyway, all the food in the shops would be gone; then what was to
be done with the thousands clamoring for more? One might collect a small
party and keep it alive somehow for an uncertain length of time?but who
was to be taken and who left? No obviously right course presented itself
however I tried to look at it.

What was going on was a grim business without chivalry, with no give,
and all take, about it. A man humping into another and feeling that he
carried a parcel would snatch it and duck away, on the chance that it
contained something to eat, while the loser clutched furiously at the
air or hit out indiscriminately. Once I had to step hurriedly aside to
avoid being knocked down by an elderly man who darted into the roadway
with no care for possible obstacles. His expression was vastly cunning,
and he clutched avariciously to his chest two cans of red paint. On a
corner my way was blocked by a group almost weeping with frustration
over a bewildered child who could see but was just too young to
understand what they wanted of it.

I began to become uneasy. Fighting with my civilized urge to be of some
help to these people was an instinct that told me to keep clear. They
were already fast losing ordinary restraints. I felt, too, an irrational
sense of guilt at being able to see while they could not. It gave me an
odd feeling that I was hiding from them even while I moved among them.
Later on I found how right the instinct was.

Close to Golden Square I began to think of turning left and working back
to Regent Street, where the wider roadway would offer easier going. I
was about to take a corner that would lead me that way when a sudden
piercing scream stopped me. It stopped everyone else too. All along the
street they stood still, turning their heads this way and that,
apprehensively trying to guess what was happening. The alarm, coming on
top of their distress and nervous tension, started a number of the women
whimpering. The men?s nerves weren?t in any too good a state either;
they showed it mostly in short curses at being startled. For it was an
ominous sound, one of the kinds of thing they had been subconsciously
expecting. They waited for it to come again.

It did. Frightened, and dying into a gasp. But less alarming now that
one was ready for *it. *This time I was able to place it. A few steps
took me to an alley entrance. As I turned the corner a cry that was half
a gasp came again.

The cause of it was a few yards down the alley. A girl was crouched on
the ground while a burly man laid into her with a thin brass rod. The
back of her dress was torn, and the flesh beneath showed red weals. As I
came closer I saw why she did not run away?her hands were tied together
behind her back, and a cord tethered them to the man?s left wrist.

I reached the pair as his arm was raised for another stroke. It was easy
to snatch the rod from his unexpecting hand and bring it down with some
force upon his shoulder. He promptly lashed a heavy boot out in my
direction, but I had dodged back quickly, and his radius of action was
limited by the cord on his wrist. He made another swiping kick at the
air while I was feeling in my pocket for a knife. Finding nothing there,
he turned and kicked the girl for good measure, instead. Then he swore
at her and pulled on the cord to bring her to her feet. I slapped him on
the side of his head, just hard enough to stop him and make his head
sing for a bit?somehow I could not bring myself to lay out a blind man,
even this type. While he was steadying himself from that I stooped
swiftly and cut the cord which joined them. A slight shove on the man?s
chest sent him staggering back and half turned him so that he lost his
bearings. With his freed left hand he let out a fine raking swing. It
missed me, but ultimately reached the brick wall. After that he lost
interest in pretty well everything but the pain of his cracked knuckles.
I helped the girl up, loosed her hands, and led her away down the alley
while he was still blistering the air behind us.

As we turned into the street she began to come out of her daze. She
turned a smeary, tear-stained face and looked up at me.

?But you can /see!? /she said incredulously.

?Certainly I can,? I told her.

?Oh, thank God! Thank God! I thought I was the only one,? she said, and
burst into tears again.

I looked around us. A few yards away there was a pub with a phonograph
playing, glasses smashing, and a high old time being had by all. A
little beyond it was a smaller pub, still intact. A good heave wish my
shoulder broke in the door to the saloon bar. I half carried the girl in
and put her in a chair. Then I dismembered another chair and put two of
its legs through the handles of the swing doors for the discouragement
of further visitors before I turned my attention to the restoratives at
the bar.

There was no hurry. She sipped at, and snuffled over, the first drink. I
gave her time to get on top of things, twiddling the stem of my glass
and listening to the phonograph in the other pub churning out the
currently popular, if rather lugubrious, ditty:


/?My love?s locked up in a frigidaire,/

/And my heart?s in a deep-freeze pack./

/She?s gone with a guy, I?d not know where,/

/But she wrote that she?d never come back./

/Now she don?t care for me no more,/

/i?m just a one-man frozen store, And it ain?t nice/

/To be on ice/

/With my love locked up in a frigidaire,/

/And my heart in a deep-freeze pack.?/


While I sat I stole an occasional covert look at the girl. Her clothes,
or the remnants of them, were good quality. Her voice was good
too?probably not stage or movie acquired, for it had not deteriorated
under stress. She was blond, but quite a number of shades sub-platinum.
It seemed likely that

beneath the smudges and smears she was good-looking. Her height was
three or four inches less than mine, her build slim but not thin. She
looked as if she had strength if is were necessary, but strength which,
in her approximately twenty-four years, had most likely nor been applied
to anything more important than hitting balls. dancing. and, probably,
restraining horses. Her well-shaped hands were smooth, and the
fingernails that were still unbroken showed a length more decorative
than practical.

The drink gradually did good work. By the end of it she was sufficiently
recovered for habit of mind to assert itself.

?God, I must look awful,? she remarked.

It did not seem that anyone but me was likely to be in a position to
notice that, but I left it.

She got up and walked over to a mirror.


?I certainly do,? she confirmed. ?Where??

?You might try through there,? I suggested.

Twenty minutes or so passed before she came hack. Considering the
limited facilities there must have been, she?d made a good job; morale
was much restored. She approximated now the film director?s idea of the
heroine after a roughhouse, rather than the genuine thing.

?Cigarette?? I inquired as I slid another fortifying glass
across.
   While the pulling-round process was completing itself we swapped
stories. To give her rime, I let her have mine first.    

Then she said:

?I?m damned ashamed of myself. I?m not a bit like that
really?like you found me, I mean. In fact, I?m reasonably self-reliant,
though you might not think it. But somehow the whole thing had got too
big for me. What has happened is bad enough, but the awful prospect
ahead suddenly seemed too much to bear, and I panicked. I had got to
thinking that perhaps I was the only person left in the whole world who
could see. It got inc down, and all at once I was frightened and silly;
I cracked, and howled like a girl in a Victorian melodrama. I?d never,
never have believed it of me.?

Don?t let it worry you,? I said. ?We?ll probably be learn-kg a whole lot
of surprising things about ourselves soon.?

But it does worry me. If I start off by slipping my gears like that??
She left the sentence unfinished.

?I was near enough to panic in that hospital,? I said. ?We?re human
beings, not calculating machines.?

Her name was Josella Playton. There seemed to be something familiar
about that, but I could not place it. Her home was in Dene Road, St.
John?s Wood. The district fitted in more or less with my surmises. I
remembered Dene Road. Detached, comfortable houses, mostly ugly, but all
expensive. Her escape from the general affliction had been no less a
matter of luck than mine?well, perhaps more. She had been at a party on
that Monday night?a pretty considerable party, it seemed.

?I reckon somebody who thinks that kind of thing funny must have been
tooling with the drinks,? she said. ?I?ve never felt so ill as I did at
the end of it?and I didn?t take a lot.?

Tuesday she recollected as a day of blurred misery and record hangover.
About four in the afternoon she had had more than enough of it. She rang
the bell and gave instructions that come comets, earthquakes, or the day
of judgment itself, she was not to be disturbed. Upon that ultimatum she
had taken a strong dose of sleeping draught, which on an empty stomach
had worked with the efficiency of a knockout drop.

From then on she had known nothing until this morning, when she had been
awakened by her father stumbling into her room.

?Josella,? he was saying, ?for God?s sake get Dr. Mayle. Tell him I?ve
gone blind?stone blind.?

She had been amazed to see that it was already almost nine o?clock. She
got up and dressed hurriedly. The servants had answered neither her
father?s bell nor her own. When she went to rouse them she had found to
her horror that they, too, were blind.

With the telephone out of order, the only course seemed to be for her to
take the car and fetch the doctor herself. The quiet streets and absence
of traffic had seemed queer, but she had already driven almost a mile
before it came to her what had happened. When she realized, she had all
but turned back in panic?but that wasn?t going to do anyone any good.
There was still the chance that the doctor might have escaped the
malady, whatever it was, just as she herself had. So, with a desperate
but waning hope, she had driven on.

Halfway down Regent Street the engine started to miss and sputter;
finally it stopped. In her hurried start she had not looked at the
gauge: the tank had run dry.

She sat there for a moment, dismayed. Every face in sight was now turned
toward her, but she had realized by this time that not one of those she
saw could see or help her. She got out of the car, hoping to find a
garage somewhere near by, or, if there was none, prepared to walk the
rest of the way. As


she slammed the door behind her, a voice called:

?Hey! Just a minute, mate!?

She turned and saw a man groping toward her.

?What is it?? she asked. She was by no means taken with the look of him.

His manner changed on hearing her voice.

?I?m lost. Dunno where I am,? he said.

?This is Regent Street. The New Gallery cinema?s just behind you,? she
told him, and turned to go.

?Just show me where the curb is, miss, will you?? he said. She
hesitated, and in that moment he came close. The outstretched hand
sought and touched her sleeve. He lunged forward and caught both her
arms in a painful grip.

?So you can /see, /can you!? he said. ?Why the hell should you be able
to see when I can?t?nor anyone else??

Before she realized what was happening he had turned her and tripped
her, and she was lying in the road with his knee in her back. He caught
both her wrists in the grasp of one large hand and proceeded to tie them
together with a piece of string from his pocket. Then he stood up and
pulled her onto her feet again.

?All right,? he said. ?From now on you can do your seeing for me. I?m
hungry. Take me where there?s a bit of good grub. Get on with it.?


?I think, Bill,? she said, ?that though you wouldn?t have guessed it to
look at him, he wasn?t perhaps too bad a man really. Only he was
frightened. Deep down inside him he was much more frightened than I was.
He gave me some food and something to drink. He only started beating me
like that because he was drunk and I wouldn?t go into his house with
him. I don?t know what would have happened if you hadn?t come along.?
She paused. Then she added: ?But I am pretty ashamed of myself. Shows
you what a modern young woman can come to after all, doesn?t it?
Screaming, and collapsing with the vapors Hell!?

She was looking, and obviously feeling, rather better, though she winced
as she reached for her glass.

?I think,? I said, ?that I?ve been fairly dense over this business?and
pretty lucky. I ought to have made more of the implications when I saw
that woman with the child in Piccadilly. It?s only been chance that?s
stopped me from falling into the same kind of mess that you did.?

?Anybody who has had a great treasure has always led a precarious
existence,? she said reflectively.


 ?I?ll go on bearing that in mind henceforth,? I told her.

?It?s already very well impressed on mine,? she remarked. We sat
listening to the uproar from the other pub for a few minutes.

?And what,? I said at last, ?just what, do we propose to do now??

?I must get back home. There?s my father. It?s obviously no good going
on to try to find the doctor now?even if he has been one of the lucky ones.?

She seemed about to add something, but hesitated.

?Do you mind if I come too?? I asked. ?This doesn?t seem to me the sort
of time when anyone like us should be wandering about on his or her own.?

She turned with a grateful look.

?Thank you. I almost asked, but I thought there might be somebody you?d
he wanting to look for.?

?There isn?t,? I said. ?Not in London, at any rate.?

?Im glad. It?s not so much that I?m afraid of getting caught again?I?ll
be much too careful for that. But, to he honest, it?s the loneliness I?m
afraid of. I?m beginning to feel so?so cut off and stranded.?

I was beginning to see things in another new light. The sense of release
was tempered with a growing realization of the grimness that might lie
ahead of us. It had been impossible at first not to feel some
superiority, and, therefore, confidence. Our chances of surviving the
catastrophe were a million times greater than those of the rest. Where
they must fumble, grope, and guess, we had simply to walk in and take.
Butt here were going to be a lot of things beyond that.

I said: ?I wonder just how many of us have escaped and can still see?
I?ve come across one other man, a child, and a baby; you?ve met none. It
looks to me as if we are going to find out that sight is very rare
indeed. Some of the others have evidently grasped already that their
only chance of survival is to get hold of someone who can see. When they
all understand that, the outlooks going to he none too good.?

The future seemed to me at that time a choice between a lonely
existence, always in fear of capture, or of gathering together a
selected group which we could rely on to protect us from other groups.
We?d be filling a kind of leadercum-prisoner role?and along with it went
a nasty picture of still uncomfortably elaborating these possibilities
when Josella bloody gang wars being fought for possession of us. I was
recalled me to the present by getting up.

I must go,? she said. ?Poor Father. It?s after four o?clock.?

Back in Regent Street again, a thought suddenly struck me.

?Come across,? I said. ?I fancy I remember a shop somewhere here

The shop was still there. We equipped ourselves with a couple of
useful-looking sheath knives, and belts to carry them.

?Makes me feel like a pirate,? said Josella as she buckled hers on.

?Better, I imagine, to be a pirate than a pirate?s moll,? I told her.

A few yards up the street we came upon a large, shiny saloon car. It
looked the kind of craft that should simply have purred. But the noise
when I started it up sounded louder in our ears than all the normal
traffic of a busy street. We made our way northward, zigzagging to avoid
derelicts and wanderers stricken into immobility in the middle of the
road by the sound of our approach. All the way heads turned hopefully
toward us as we came, and faces fell as we went past. One building on
our route was blazing fiercely, and a cloud of smoke rose from another
fire somewhere along Oxford Street. There were more people about in
Oxford Circus, but we got through them neatly, then passed the B.B.C.,
and so north to the carriageway in Regent?s Park.

It was a relief to get out of the streets and reach an open space?and
one where there were no unfortunate people wandering and groping. The
only moving things we could see on the broad stretches of grass were two
or three little groups of triffids lurching southward. Somehow or other
they had contrived to pull up their stakes and were dragging them along
behind them on their chains. I remembered that there were some undocked
specimens, a few of them tethered, but most of them double-fenced, in an
enclosure beside the zoo, and wondered how they had got out. Josella
noticed them too.

?It?s not going to make much difference to them,? she said.

For the rest of the way there was little to delay us. Within a few
minutes I was pulling up at the house she showed me, We got out of the
car, and I pushed open the gate. A short drive curved round a bed of
bushes which hid most of the house front from the road. As we turned the
corner, Josella gave a cry and ran forward. A figure was lying on the
gravel, chest downward, but with the head turned to show one side of its
face. The first glance at it showed me the bright red streak across the
cheek.

?Stop!? I shouted at her.


There was enough alarm in my voice to check her.

I had spotted the triffid now. It was lurking among the bushes, well
within striking range of the sprawled figure.

?Back! Quick!? I said.

Still looking at the man on the ground, she hesitated.

?But I must?? she began, turning toward me. Then she stopped. Her eyes
widened, and she screamed.

I whipped round to find a triffid towering only a few feet behind me.

In one automatic movement I had my hands over my eyes. I heard the sting
whistle as it slashed out at me?but there was no knockout, no agonizing
burning, even. One?s mind can move like lightning at such a moment;
nevertheless, it was more instinct than reason which sent me leaping at
it before ii bad time to strike again. I collided with it, overturning
it, and even as I went down with it my hands were on the upper part of
the stem, trying to pull off the cup and the sting. Triffid stems do not
snap?but they can he mangled. This one was mangled thoroughly before I
stood up.

Josella was standing in the same spot, transfixed.

?Come here,? I told her. There?s another in the bushes behind you.?

She glanced fearfully over her shoulder and came.

?But it hit you t? she said incredulously. Why aren?t you

?I don?t know. I ought to be,? I said.

I looked down at the fallen triffid. Suddenly remembering the knives
that we?d acquired with quite other enemies in mind, I used mine to cut
off the sting at its base. I examined it. ?That explains it,? I said,
pointing to the poison sacs.


?See, they?re collapsed, exhausted. If they?d been full, or even part
full I turned a thumb down.

I had that, and my acquired resistance to the poison, to thank.
Nevertheless, there were pale red marks across the backs of my hands and
my neck that were itching like the devil. I rubbed them while I stood
looking at the sting.

?It?s queer,? I murmured, more to myself than to her, but she heard me.

?What?s queer??

?I?ve never seen one with the poison sacs quite empty like this before.
It must have been doing a hell of a lot of stinging.?

But I doubt if she heard me. Her attention had reverted to the man who
was lying in the drive, and she was eying the triffid standing by.

?How can we get him away?? she asked.

?I?m afraid we can?t?not till that thing?s been dealt with,? I told her.
?Besides?well, I don?t think we can help him now.

?You mean he?s dead??

I nodded. ?Yes. There?s not a doubt of it?Eve seen others who have been
stung. Who was he? I added.

?Old Pearson. He did gardening for us, and chauffeuring for my father.
Such a dear old man?I?ve know him all my life.?

?I?m sorry?? I began, wishing I could think of something more adequate,
but she cut me short.

?Look! Oh, look!? She pointed to a path which ran round the side of the
house. A black-stockinged leg with a woman?s shoe on it protruded beyond
the corner.

We prospected carefully and then moved safely to a spot which gave a
better view. A girl in a black dress lay half on the path and half in a
flower bed. Her pretty. fresh face was scarred with a bright red line.
Josella choked. Tears came into her eyes.

?Oh! Oh, it?s Annie! Poor little Annie,? she said.

I tried to console her a little.

?They can scarcely have known /it, /either of them,? I told her. ?When
it is strong enough to kill, it?s mercifully quick.?

We did nor see any other triffid in hiding there. Possibly the same one
had attacked them both. Together we crossed the path and got into the
house by the side door. Josella called. There was no answer. She called
again. We both listened in the complete silence that wrapped the house.
She turned to look at me. Neither of us said anything. Quietly she led
the way along a passage to a baize-covered door. As she opened it there
was a swish, and something slapped across the door and frame, an inch or
so above her head. Hurriedly she pulled the door shut again and turned
wide-eyed to me.

?There?s one in the ball,? she said.

She spoke in a frightened half whisper, as though it might be listening.

We went back to the outer door, and into the garden once more. Keeping
to the grass for silence, we made our way round the house until we could
look into the lounge hail. The French window which led from the garden
was open, and the glass of one side was shattered. A trail of muddy
blobs led over the step and across the carpet. At the end of it a
triffid stood in the middle of the room. The top of its stem almost
bushed the ceiling, and it was swaying ever so slightly. Close beside
its damp, shaggy bole lay the body of an elderly man clad in a bright
silk dressing gown. I took hold of Josella?s arm, afraid she might rush
in there.

?Is it?your father?? I asked, though I knew it must be. ?Yes,? she said,
and put her hands over her face. She was trembling a little.

I stood still, keeping an eye on the triffid inside lest it should move
our way. Then I thought of a handkerchief and handed her mine. There
wasn?t much anyone could do. After a little while she took more control
of herself. Remembering the people we had seen that day, I said:

?You know, I think I would rather /that /had happened to me than to be
like those others.?

?Yes,? she said, after a pause.

She looked up into the sky. It was a soft, depthless blue, with a few
little clouds floating like white feathers.

?Oh yes,? she repeated with more conviction. ?Poor Daddy. He couldn?t
have stood blindness. He loved all this too much.? She glanced inside
the room again. ?What shall we do? I can?t leave??

At that moment I caught the reflection of movement in the remaining
windowpane. I looked behind us quickly to see a triffid break clear of
the bushes and start across the lawn. It was lurching on a line that led
straight toward us. I could hear the leathery leaves rustling as the
stem whipped back and forth.

There was no time for delay. I had no idea how many more there might be
round the place. I grabbed Josella?s arm again and ran her back by the
way we had come. As we scrambled safely into the car, she burst into
real tears at last.

She would be the better for having her cry out. I lit a cigarette and
considered the next move. Naturally she was not going to care for the
idea of leaving her father as we had found him. She would wish that he
should have a proper burial?and, by the looks of it, that would be a
matter of the pair of us digging the grave and effecting the whole
business. And before that could even be attempted it would be necessary
to fetch the means to deal with the triffids that were already there and
keep off any more that might appear. On the whole, I would be in favor
of dropping the whole thing? but then it was not my father..

The more I considered this new aspect of things, the less I liked it. I
had no idea how many triffids there might be in London. Every park had a
few at least. Usually they kept some docked ones that were allowed to
roam about as they would; often there were others, with stings intact,
either staked or safely behind wire netting. Thinking of those we had
seen crossing Regent?s Park, I wondered just how many they had been in
the habit of keeping in the pens by the zoo and how many had escaped.
There?d be a number in private gardens too; you?d expect all those to be
safely docked? but you never can tell what fool carelessness may go on.
And then there were several nurseries of things and experimental
stations a little farther out.

While I sat there pondering I was aware of something nudging at the back
of my mind, some association of ideas that didn?t quite join up. I
sought it for a moment or two, then, suddenly, it came. I could almost
hear Walter?s voice speaking, saying:

I tell you, a triffid?s in a damn sight better position to survive than
a blind man.?

Of course he had been talking about a man who had been blinded by a
triffid sting. All the same, it was a jolt. More than a jolt. It scared
me a bit.

I thought back. No, it had just arisen out of general
speculation?nevertheless, it seemed a hit uncanny now.


?Take away our sight,? he had said, ?and our superiority to them is gone.?

Of course coincidences are happening alt the time?but it?s just now and
then you happen to notice them. ...

A crunch on the gravel brought me back to the present. /A /triffid came
swaying down the drive toward the gate. I leaned across and screwed up
the window.

?Drive on! Drive on!? said Josella hysterically.

?We?re all right here,? I told her. ?I want to see what it does.?

Simultaneously I realized that one of my questions was solved. Being
accustomed to triffids, I had forgotten how most people felt about an
undocked one. I suddenly understood that there would be no question of
coming back here. Josella?s feeling about an armed triffid was the
general one? get well away from it, and stay away.

The thing paused by the gatepost. One could have sworn that it was
listening. We sat perfectly still and quiet, Josella staring at it with
horror. I expected it to lash out at the car, but it didn?t. Probably
the muffling of our voices inside had misled it into thinking we were
out of range. The little bare stalks began abruptly to clatter against
its stem. It swayed, lumbered clumsily oft to the right, and disappeared
into the next driveway.

Josella gave a sigh /of /relief.

?Oh, let?s get away before it comes back,? she implored. I started the
car, turned it round, and we drove off Londonward again.




        V
        A LIGHT IN THE NIGHT



Josella began to recover her self-possession. With the deliberate and
obvious intention of taking her mind off what lay behind us, she asked:

?Where are we going now??

?Clerkenwell first,? I told her. ?After that we?ll see about getting you
same more clothes. Bond Street for them, if you like, but Clerkenwell
first.?

?But why Clerkenwell?? Good heavens!?

She might well exclaim. We bad turned a corner to see the street seventy
yards ahead of us filled with people. They were coming toward us at a
stumbling run, with their arms outstretched before them. A mingled
crying and screaming came from them. Even as we came into sight of them
a woman at the front tripped and fell; others tumbled over her, and she
disappeared beneath a kicking, struggling heap. Beyond the mob we had a
glimpse of the cause of it all: three dark-leaved stems swaying beyond
the panic-stricken beads. I accelerated and swung off into a byroad.

Josella turned a terrified face.

?Did?did you see what that /was? /They were /driving /them.?

?Yes,? I said. ?That?s why we are going to Clerkenwell. There?s a place
there that makes the best triffid guns and masks in the world.?

We worked back again and picked up our intended route, but we did not
find the clear run I had hoped for. Near King?s Cross Station there were
many more people on the streets. Even with a hand on the horn it grew
increasingly difficult to get along. In front of the station itself it
became impossible. Why there should have been such crowds in that place,
I don?t know. All the people in the district seemed to have converged
upon it. We could not get through them, and a glance behind showed that
it would be almost as hopeless to fly to go back. Those we bad passed
had already closed in on our track.

?Get out, quick!? I said. ?I think they?re after us.?

?But_   _? Josella began.

?Hurry!? I said shortly.

I blew a final blast on the horn and slipped out after her, leaving the
engine running. We were not many seconds too soon. A man found the
handle of the rear door. lie pulled /it /open and pawed inside. We were
all but pushed over by the pressure of others making for the car. There
was a shout of anger when somebody opened the front door and found the
seats there empty too. By that time we ourselves had safely become
members of the crowd. Somebody grabbed the man who had opened the rear
door, under the impression that it was he who had just got out. Around
that the confusion began to thrive. I took a firm grip of Josella?s
hand, and /we /started to worm our way along as unobviously as possible.

Clear of the crowd at last, we kept on foot for a while, looking out for
a suitable car. After a mile or so we found it? a station wagon, likely
to be more useful than an ordinary body /for /the plan that /was
/beginning to form vaguely in my mind.

In Clerkenwell they had been accustomed for two or three centuries to
make fine, precise instruments. The small factory I had dealt with
professionally at times had adapted the old skill to new needs. I found
it with little difficulty, nor was it hard to break in. ?When we set off
again, there was a comforting sense of support to be derived from
several excellent triffid guns, some thousands of little steel
boomerangs for them, and some wire-mesh helmets that we bad loaded into
the back.

?And now?clothes?? suggested Josella as we started.

?Provisional plan, open to criticism and correction,? I told her.
?First, what you might call a /pied-A-verre; /i.e., some-where to pull
ourselves together and discuss things.?

?Not another bar,? she protested. ?I?ve had quite enough of bars for one
day.?

?Improbable though my friends might think it?with everything free?so
have I,? I agreed. ?What I was thinking of was an empty apartment. That
shouldn?t be difficult to find. We could ease up there awhile, and
settle the rough plan of campaign. Also, it would be convenient for
spending the night?or, if you find that the trammels of convention still
defy the peculiar circumstances, well, maybe we could make it two
apartments.?

?I think I?d be happier to know there was someone close at hand.?

?Okay,? I agreed. ?Then Operation Number Two will be ladies? and gents?
outfitting. For that perhaps we had better go our separate ways?both
taking exceedingly good care not to forget which apartment it was that
we decided on,?

?Y-es,? she said, but a little doubtfully.

?It?ll be all right,? I assured her. ?Make a rule for yourself not to
speak to anyone, and nobody?s going to guess you can see. It was only
being quite unprepared that landed you in that mess before. ?In the
country of the blind the one-eyed man is king.?

?Oh yes?Wells said that, didn?t he? Only in the story it turned out not
to be true.?

?The crux of the difference lies in what you mean by the word
?country??patria in the original,? I said. /?Caecorum in patria luscus
rex imperat omnis?a /classical gentleman called Fullonius said that:
it?s all anyone seems to remember about him. But there?s no organized
/patria, /no state, here?only chaos, Wells imagined a people who had
adapted themselves to blindness. I don?t think that is going to happen
here?I don?t see how it can.

?What do you think /is /going to happen??

?My guess would be no better than yours. And soon we shall begin to
know, anyway. Better get back to matters in hand. Where were we??

?Choosing clothes.?

?Oh yes. Well, it?s simply a matter of slipping into a shop, adopting a
few trifles, and slipping out again. You?ll not meet any triffids in
central London?at least, not yet.?

?You talk so lightly about taking things,? she said.

?I don?t feel quite so lightly about it,? I admitted. ?But I?m not sure
that that?s virtue?it?s more likely merely habit. And an obstinate
refusal to face facts isn?t going to bring anything back, or help us at
all. I think we?ll have to try to see ourselves not as the robbers of
all this but more as?well, the unwilling heirs to it.?

?Yes. I suppose it is?something like that,? she agreed in a qualified way.

She was silent for a time. When she spoke again she reverted to the
earlier question.

?And after the clothes?? she asked.

?Operation Number Three,? I told her, ?is, quite definitely, dinner.?


There was, as I had expected, no great difficulty about the apartment.
We left the car locked up in the middle of the road in front of an
opulent-looking block and climbed to the third story. Quite why we chose
the third I can?t say, except that it seemed a bit more out of the way.
The process of selection was simple. We knocked or we rang, and if
anyone answered, we passed on. After we had passed on three times we
found a door where there was no response. The socket of the rim lock
tore off to one good heft of the shoulder, and we were in.

I myself had not been one of those addicted to living in an apartment
with a rent of some two thousand pounds a year, but I found that there
were decidedly things to be said in favor of it, The interior decorators
had been, I guessed, elegant young men with just that ingenious gift for
combining taste with advanced topicality which is so expensive.
Consciousness of fashion was the mainspring of the place. Here and there
were certain unmistakable /derniers cris, /some of them undoubtedly
destined?had the world pursued its expected course?to become the rage of
tomorrow; others, I would say, a dead loss from their very inception.
The over-all effect was Trade Fair in its neglect of human foibles?a
book left a few inches out of place or with the wrong color on its
jacket would ruin the whole carefully considered balance and tone?so,
too, would the person thoughtless enough to wear the wrong clothes when
sitting upon the wrong luxurious chair or sofa. I turned to Josella, who
was staring wide-eyed at it all.

?Will this little shack serve?or do we go farther?? I asked.

?Oh, I guess we?ll make out,? she said. And together we waded through
the delicate cream carpet to explore.

It was quite uncalculated, but I could scarcely have hit upon a more
satisfactory method of taking her mind off the events of the day. Our
tour was punctuated with a series of exclamations in which admiration,
envy, delight, contempt, and, one must confess, malice all played their
parts. Josella paused on the threshold of a room rampant with all the
most aggressive manifestations of femininity.

?I?ll sleep here,? she said.

?My God!? I remarked. ?Well, each to her taste.?

?Don?t be nasty. I probably won?t have another chance to be decadent.
Besides, don?t you know there?s a bit of the dumbest film star in every
girl? So I?ll let it have its final fling.?

?You shall,? I said. ?But I hope they keep something quieter around
here, Heaven preserve mc from having to sleep in a bed with a mirror set
in the ceiling over it.?

?There?s one above the bath too,? she said, looking into an adjoining room.

?I don?t know whether that would be the zenith or nadir of decadence,? I
said. ?But anyway, you?ll not be using it. No hot water.?

?Oh, I?d forgotten that. What a shame!? she exclaimed disappointedly.

We completed our tour of the premises, finding the rest less
sensational. Then she went out to deal with the matter of clothes. I
made an inspection of the apartment?s resources and limitations and then
set out on an expedition of my own.

As I stepped outside, another door farther down the passage opened. I
stopped, and stood still where I was. A young man came out, leading a
fair-haired girl by the hand. As she stepped over the threshold he
released his grasp.

?Wait just a minute, darling,? he said.

He took three or four steps on the silencing carpet. His outstretched
hands found the window which ended the passage. His fingers went
straight to the catch and opened it. I had a glimpse of a low-railed,
ornamental balcony outside.

?What are you doing, Jimmy?? she asked.

?Just making sure,? he said, stepping quickly back to her and feeling
for her hand again. ?Come along, darling.?

She hung back.

?Jimmy?I don?t like leaving here. At least we know where we are in our
own apartment. How are we going to feed? How are we going to live??

In the apartment, darling, we shan?t feed at all?and therefore not live
long. Come along, sweetheart. Don?t be afraid.?

But I am. Jimmy?I am.?

She clung to him, and he put one arm round her.

   ?We?ll be all right, darling. Come along.

   ?But, Jimmy, that?s the wrong way? You?ve got it twisted round, dear.
It?s the right way.?

   ?Jimmy?I?m so frightened. Let?s go back.?

   ?It?s too late, darling.?

By the window be paused. With one hand he felt his position very
carefully. Then he put both arms round her, holding her to him.

?Too wonderful to last, perhaps,? he said softly. ?I love you, my sweet.
I love you so very, very much.?

She tilted her lips up to be kissed.

As he lifted her he turned, and stepped out of the window.


?You?ve got to grow a hide,? I told myself. /?Got to. /Its either that
or stay permanently drunk. Things like that must be happening all
around. They?ll go on happening. You can?t help it. Suppose you?d given
them food to keep them alive for another few days? What after that?
You?ve got to learn to take it, and come to terms with it. There?s
nothing else but the alcoholic funk hole. If you don?t fight to live
your own life in spite of it, there won?t be /any /survival. . . . Only
those who can make their minds tough enough to stick it are going to get
through ...?


It took me longer than I had expected to collect what I wanted.
Something like two hours had passed before I got back. I dropped one or
two things from my armful in negotiating the door. Josella?s voice
called, with a trace of nervousness, from that overfeminine room.

?Only me,? I reassured her as I advanced down the passage with the load.

I dumped the things in the kitchen and went back for those I?d dropped.
Outside her door I paused.

?You can?t come in.? she said.

?That wasn?t quite my intended angle,? I protested. ?What I want to know
is, can you cook??

?Boiled-egg standard,? said her muffled voice.

?I was afraid of that. There?s an awful lot of things we?re going to
have to learn,? I told her.

I went back to the kitchen. I erected the kerosene stove I had brought
on top of the useless electric cooker and got busy.

When I?d finished laying the places at the small table in the sitting
room the effect seemed to me fairly good. I fetched a few candles and
candlesticks to complete it, and set them ready. Of Josella there was
still no visible sign, though there had been sounds of running water
some little time ago. I called her.

?Just coming,? she answered.

I wandered across to the window and looked out. Quite consciously I
began saying good-by to it all. The sun was low. Towers, spires, and
facades of Portland stone were white or pink against the dimming sky.
More fires had broken out here and there. The smoke climbed in big black
smudges, sometimes with a lick of flame at the bottom of them. Quite
likely, I told myself, I would never in my life again see any of these
familiar buildings after tomorrow. There might be a time when one would
be able to come back?but not to the same place. Fires and weather would
have worked on it; it would be visibly dead and abandoned. But now, at a
distance, it could still masquerade as a living city.

My father once told me that before Hitler?s war he used to go round
London with his eyes more widely open than ever before, seeing the
beauties of buildings that be had never noticed before?and saying
good-by to them. And now I had a similar feeling. But this was something
worse. Much more than anyone could have hoped for had survived that war?
but this was an enemy they would not survive, it was not wanton smashing
and willful burning that they waited for this time: it was simply the
long, slow, inevitable course of decay and collapse.

Standing there, and at that time, my heart still resisted what my head
was telling me. Still I had the feeling that it was all something too
big, too unnatural really to happen. Yet I knew that it was by no means
the first time that it had happened. The corpses of other great cities
are lying buried in deserts and obliterated by the jungles of Asia. Some
of them fell so long ago that even their names have gone with them. But
to those who lived there their dissolution can have seemed no more
probable or possible than the necrosis of a great modem city seemed to
me. ...

It must be, I thought, one of the race?s most persistent and comforting
hallucinations to trust that ?it can?t happen here?- that one?s own
little time and place is beyond cataclysms.


And now it was happening here. Unless there should be some miracle, I
was looking on the beginning of the end of London?and very likely, it
seemed, there were other men, not unlike me, who were looking at the
beginning of the end of New York, Paris, San Francisco, Buenos Aires,
Bombay, and all the rest of the cities that were destined to go the way
of those others under the jungles.

I was still looking out when a sound of movement came from behind me. I
turned, and saw that Josella had come into the room. She was wearing a
long, pretty frock of palest blue georgette with a little jacket of
white fur. In a pendant on a simple chain a few blue-white diamonds
flashed; the stones that gleamed in her ear clips were smaller but as
fine in color. Her hair and her face might have been fresh from a beauty
parlor. She crossed the floor with a flicker of silver slippers and a
glimpse of gossamer stockings. As I went on staring without speaking,
her mouth lost its little smile.

?Don?t you like it?? she asked with childish halt disappointment.

?It?s lovely?you?re beautiful,? I told her. ?I?well, I just wasn?t
expecting anything like this   

Something more was needed. I knew that it was a display which had little
or nothing to do with me. I added:

?You?re?saying good-by??

A different look came into her eyes.

?So you do understand. I hoped you would.?

?I think I do. I?m glad you?ve done it. It?ll be a lovely thing to
remember,? I said.

I stretched out my hand to her and led her to the window.

?I was saying good-by too?to all this.?

What went on in her mind as we stood there side by side is her secret.
In mine there was a kind of kaleidoscope of the life and ways that were
now finished?or perhaps /it /was more like flipping through a huge
volume of photographs with one, all-comprehensive ?do-you-remember??

We looked for a long time, lost in our thoughts. Then she sighed. She
glanced down at her dress, fingering the delicate silk.

?Silly? Rome burning?? she said with a rueful little smile. ?No?sweet,?
I said. ?Thank you for doing it. A gesture? and a reminder that with all
the faults there was so much beauty. You couldn?t have done?or looked?a
lovelier thing.?

Her smile lost its ruefulness.

?Thank you, Bill.? She paused. Then she added: ?Have I said thank you
before? I don?t think I have. If you hadn?t helped me when you did

?But for you,? I told her, ?I should probably by now be lying

 maudlin and sozzled in some bar. /I /have just as much to

thank you for. This is no time to be alone.? Then, to change the trend,
I added: ?And speaking of drink, there?s an excellent amontillado here,
and some pretty good things to follow. This is a very well-found apartment.?

I poured out the sherry, and we raised our glasses.

?To health, strength?and luck,? I said.

She nodded. We drank.

?What,? Josella asked as we started on an expensive-tast/ing pate, ?if
/the owner of all this suddenly comes back??

In that case we will explain?and he or she should be only too thankful
to have someone here to tell him which bottle is which, and so on?but I
don?t think that is very likely to happen.?


?No,? she agreed, considering. ?No. I?m afraid that?s not very likely. I
wonder  ? She looked round the room. Her eyes paused at a fluted white
pedestal. ?Did you try the radio?I suppose that thing /is /a radio,
isn?t it??

?It?s a television projector too,? I told her. ?But no good. No power.?

?Of course. I forgot. I suppose we?ll go on forgetting things like that
for quite a time.?

?But I did try one when I was out.? I said. ?A battery affair. Nothing
doing. All broadcast bands as silent as the grave.?

?That means it?s like this everywhere??

?I?m afraid so. There was something pip-pipping away around forty-two
meters. Otherwise nothing. I wonder who and where he was, poor chap.?

?It?s?it?s going to be pretty grim, Bill, isn?t it??

?It?s? No, I?m nor going to have my dinner clouded,? I said. ?Pleasure
before business-and the future is definitely business. Let?s talk about
something interesting, like how many love affairs you have had and why
somebody hasn?t married you long before this?or has he? You see how
little I know, Life story, please.?

?Well,? she said, ?I was born about three miles from here. My mother was
very annoyed about it at the time.?


I raised my eyebrows.

?You see, she had quite made up her mind that I should be an American.
But when the car came to take her to the airport it was just too late.
Full of impulses, she was?I think I inherited some of them.?

She prattled on. There was not much remarkable about her early life, but
I think she enjoyed herself in summarizing it and forgetting where we
were for a while. I enjoyed listening to her babble of the familiar and
amusing things that had all vanished from the world outside. We worked
lightly through childhood, schooldays, and ?coming out??insofar as the
term still meant anything.

I did nearly get married when I was nineteen,? she admitted, ?and aren?t
I glad now it didn?t happen. But I didn?t feel like that at the time. I
had a frightful row with Daddy, who?d broken the whole thing up because
he saw right away that Lionel was a spizzard and??

?A what?? I interrupted.

?A spizzard. A sort of cross between a spiv and a lizard ? the lounge
kind. So then I cut my family off and went and lived with a girl I knew
who had an apartment. And my family cut off my allowance, which was a
very silly thing to do, because it might have had just the opposite
effect from what they intended. As it happened, it didn?t, because all
the girls I knew who were making out that way seemed to me to have a
very wearing sort of time of it. Not much fun, and an awful lot of
jealousy to put up with?and so much planning. You?d never believe how
much planning it needs to keep one or two second strings in good
condition?or do I mean two or three spare strings?? She pondered.

?Never mind,? I told her. ?I get the general idea. You just didn?t want
the strings at all.?

?Intuitive, you are. All the same, I couldn?t just sponge on the girl
who had the apartment. I did have to have some money, so I wrote the book.?

I did not think I?d heard quite aright.

?You made a book?? I suggested.

?I /wrote /the book.? She glanced at me and smiled. ?I must look awful
dumb?that?s just the way /they /all used to look at me when I told them
I was writing a book. Mind you, it wasn?t a very good book?I mean, not
like Aldous or Charles or people of that kind?but it worked.?

I refrained from asking which of many possible Charleses this referred
to. I simply asked:

?You mean it did get published??

?Oh yes. And it really brought in quite a lot of money. The film rights??

?What was this book?? I asked curiously.

?It was called /Sex is My Adventure.?/

I stared and then smote my forehead.

?Josella Playton, of course. I couldn?t think why that name kept on
nearly ringing bells. You wrote that thing?? I added incredulously.

I couldn?t think why I had not remembered before. Her photograph had
been all over the place?not a very good photograph, now I could look at
the original, and the book had been all over the place too. Two large
circulating libraries had banned it, probably on the title alone. After
that its success had been assured, and the sales went rocketing up into
the hundred thousands. Josella chuckled. I was glad to hear it.

?Oh dear,? she said. ?You look just like all my relatives did.?

?I can?t blame them,? I told her.

?Did you read it?? she asked.

I shook my head. She sighed.

?People are funny. All you know about it is the title and the publicity,
and you?re shocked. And it?s such a harmless little book, really.
Mixture of green-sophisticated and pink-romantic, with patches of
schoolgirly-purple. But the title was a good idea.?

?All depends what you mean by good,? I suggested. ?And you put your own
name to it, too.?

?That,? she agreed, ?was a mistake. The publishers persuaded me that it
would be so much better for publicity. From their point of view they
were right. I became quite notorious for a hit?it used to make me giggle
inside when I saw people looking speculatively at me in restaurants and
places?they seemed to find it so hard to tie up what they saw with what
they thought. Lots of people I didn?t care for took to tinning up
regularly at the apartment, so to get rid of them, and because I?d
proved that I didn?t /have /to go home, I went home again.

?The book rather spoiled things, though. People would be so
literal-minded about that title. I seem to have been keeping up a
permanent defensive ever since against people I don?t like?and those I
wanted to like were either scared or shocked. What?s so annoying is that
it wasn?t even a wicked book?it was just silly-shocking, and sensible
people ought to have seen that.?

She paused contemplatively. It occurred to rue that the sensible people
had probably decided that the author of /Sex Is My Adventure /would be
silly-shocking too, but I forebore to suggest it. We all have our
youthful follies, embarrassing to recall?but people somehow find it hard
to dismiss as a youthful folly anything that has happened to be a
financial success.

?It sort of twisted everything,? she complained. ?I was writing another
book to try to balance things up again. But I?m glad I?ll never finish
it?it was rather bitter.?

?With an equally alarming title?? I asked.

She shook her head. ?It was to be called /Here the Forsaken.?/

?H?m?well, it certainly lacks the snap of the other,? I said. ?Quotation??

?Yes.? She nodded. ?Mr. Congreve: ?Here the forsaken Virgin rests from
Love.??

?Er?oh,? I said, and thought that one over for a bit.


?And now,? I suggested, ?I think it?s about time we began to rough out a
plan of campaign. Shall I throw around a few observations first??

We lay back in two superbly comfortable armchairs. On the low table
between us stood the coffee apparatus and two glasses. Josella?s was the
small one with the cointreau. The plutocratic-looking balloon with the
puddle of unpriceable brandy was mine. Josella blew out a feather of
smoke and took a sip of her drink. Savoring the flavor, she said:

?I wonder whether we shall ever taste fresh oranges again? Okay, shoot.?

?Well, it?s no good blinking facts. We had better clear out soon. If not
tomorrow, then the day after. You can begin to see already what?s going
to happen here. At present there?s still water in the tanks. Soon there
won?t be. The whole city will begin to stink like a great sewer. There
are already some bodies lying about?every day there will be more.? I
noticed her shudder. I had for the moment, in taking the general view,
forgotten the particular application it would have for her. I hurried
on: ?That may mean typhus, or cholera, or God knows what. It?s important
to get away before anything of that kind starts.?

She nodded agreement to that.

?Then the next question seems to be, where do we go? Have you any
ideas?? I asked her.

?Well?I suppose, roughly, somewhere out of the way. A place with a good
water supply we can be sure of?a well, perhaps. And I should think it
would be best to be as high up as we reasonably can?some place where
there?ll be a nice clean wind.?

?Yes,? I said, ?I?d not thought of the clean wind part, but you?re
right. A hilltop with a good water supply?that?s not so easy offhand.? I
thought a moment. The Lake District? No, too far. Wales, perhaps? Or
maybe Exmoor or Dartmoor? or right down in Cornwall? Around Land?s End
we?d have the prevailing southwest wind coming in untainted over the
Atlantic. But that, too, was a long way. We should be dependent on towns
when it became safe to visit them again.

?What about the Sussex Downs?? Josella suggested. ?I know a lovely old
farmhouse on the north side, looking right across toward Pulborough.
It?s not on the top of hills, but it?s well up the side. There?s a wind
pump for water, and I think they make their own electricity. It?s all
been converted and modernized.?

Desirable residence, in fact. But it?s a hit near populous places. Don?t
you think we ought to get farther away??

?Well, I was wondering. How long is it going to be before it?ll be safe
to go into the towns again??

?I?ve no real idea,? I admitted. ?I?d something like a year in
mind?surely that might to be a safe enough margin??

?I see. But if we do go too far away, it isn?t going to be at all easy
to get supplies later on.?

?That is a point, certainly,? I agreed.

We dropped the matter of our final destination for the moment and got
down to working out details for our removal. In the morning, we decided,
we would first of all acquire a truck?a capacious truck?and between us
we made a list of the essentials we would put into it. If we could
finish the stocking-up, we would start on our way the next evening; if
not? and the list was growing to a length which made this appear much
the more likely?we would risk another night in London and get away the
following day.

It was close on midnight when we had finished adding our own secondary
wants to the list of musts. The result resembled a department-store
catalogue. But if it had done no more than serve to take our minds off
ourselves for the evening, it would have been worth the trouble.

Josella yawned and stood up.

?Sleepy,? she said. ?And silk sheets waiting on an ecstatic bed.?

She seemed to float across the thick carpet. With her hand on the
doorknob she stopped, and turned to regard herself solemnly in a long
mirror.

?Some things were fun,? she said, and kissed her hand to her reflection.

?Good night, you vain, sweet vision,? I said.

She turned with a small smile and then vanished through the door like a
mist drifting away.

I poured out a final drop of the superb brandy, warmed it in my hands,
and sipped it.

?Never?never again now win you see a sight like that,? I told myself.
/?Sic Transit...?/

And then, before I should become utterly morbid, I took myself to my
more modest bed.


I was stretched in comfort on the edge of sleep when there came a
knocking at the door.

?Bill,? said Josella?s voice. ?Come quickly. There?s a light!?

?What sort of a light?? I inquired, struggling out of bed.

?Outside. Come and look.?



She was standing in the passage, wrapped in the sort of garment that
could have belonged only to the owner of that remarkable bedroom.

?Good God!? I said nervously.

?Don?t be a fool,? she said irritably. ?Come and look at that light.?

A light there certainly was. Looking out of her window toward what I
judged to he the northeast, I could see a bright beam like that of a
searchlight pointed unwaveringly upward.

?That must mean there?s somebody else there who can see,? she said.

?It must,? I agreed.

I tried to locate the source of it, but in the surrounding darkness I
was unable to decide. No great distance away, I was sure, and seeming to
start in mid-air?which probably meant that it was mounted on a high
building. I hesitated.

?Better leave it till tomorrow,? I decided.

The idea of trying to find our way to it through the dark streets was
far from attractive. And it was just possible? highly unlikely, but just
possible?that it was a trap. Even a blind man who was clever, and
desperate enough, /might /be able to wire such a thing up by touch.

I found a nail file and squatted down with my eye on the level of the
window sill. With the point at the file I drew a careful line in the
paint, marking the exact direction of the beam?s source. Then I went
back to my room.

I lay awake for an hour or more. Night magnified the quiet of the city,
making the sounds which broke it the more desolate. From time to time
voices rose from the street, sharp and brittle with hysteria. Once there
was a freezing scream which seemed to revel horribly in its release from
sanity. Somewhere nor tar away there was a sobbing that went on
endlessly, hopelessly. Twice I heard the sharp reports of single pistol
shots     I gave heartfelt thanks to whatever it was that had brought
Josella and me together for companionship.

Complete loneliness was the worst stare I could imagine just then.
Alone, one would be nothing. Company meant purpose, and purpose helped
to keep the morbid fears at bay.

I tried to shut out the sounds by thinking of all the things I must do
the next day, and the day after, and the days after that; by guessing
what the beam of light might mean, and how it might affect us. But the
sobbing in the background went on and on and on, reminding me of the
things I had seen that day, and would see tomorrow....

 

The opening of the door brought me sitting up in sudden alarm. It was
Josella, carrying a lighted candle. Her eyes were wide and dark, and she
bad been crying.

?I can?t sleep,? she said. ?I?m frightened?horribly frightened. Can you
hear them?all those poor people? I can?t stand it   

She came like a child to be comforted. I?m not sure that her need of it
was much greater than mine.

She fell asleep before I did, arid with her head resting on /my /shoulder.

Still the memories of the day would not leave inc in peace. But, in the
end, one does sleep. My last recollection was of remembering the sweet,
sad voice of the girl who had sung:


/So we?ll go no more a-roving/




        VI
        RENDEZVOUS



When I awoke I could bear Josella already moving around in the kitchen.
My watch said nearly seven o?clock. By the time I had shaved
uncomfortably in cold water and dressed myself, there was a smell of
toast and coffee drifting through the apartment. I found her holding a
pan over the oil stove. She had an air of self-possession which was hard
to associate with the frightened figure of the night before. Her manner
was practical too.

?Canned milk, I?m afraid. The fridge stopped. Everything else is all
right, though,? she said.

It was difficult for a moment to believe that the expediently dressed
form before me had been the ballroom vision of the previous evening. She
had chosen a dark blue skiing suit with white-topped socks rolled above
sturdy shoes. On a dark leather belt she wore a finely made hunting
knife to replace the mediocre weapon I had found the day before. I have
no idea how I expected to find her dressed, or whether I had given the
matter any thought, but the practicality of her choice was by no means
the only impression I received as I saw her.

?Will I do, do you think?? she asked.

?Eminently,? I assured her. I looked down at myself. ?I?d wish I?d had
as much forethought. Gents? lounge suiting isn?t quite the rig for the
job,? I added.

?You could do better,? she agreed, with a candid glance at my crumpled suit.

?That light last night,? she went on, ?came from the University Tower?at
least, I?m pretty sure it did. There?s nothing else noticeable exactly
on that line. It seems about the right distance, too.?

I went into her room and looked along the scratch I had drawn on the
sill. It did, as she said, point directly at the tower. And I noticed
something more. The tower was flying two flags at the same mast. One
might have been left hoisted by chance, but two must be a deliberate
signal: the daytime equivalent of the light. We decided over breakfast
that we would postpone our planned program and make an investigation of
the tower our first job for the day.

We left the apartment about half an hour later. As I had hoped, the
station wagon, by standing out in the middle of the street, had escaped
the attentions of prowlers and was intact. Without delaying further, we
dropped the suitcases that Josella had acquired into the back among the
triffid gear, and started off.

Few people were about. Presumably weariness and the chill m the air had
made them aware that night had fallen, and not many had yet emerged from
whatever sleeping places they had found. Those who were to be seen were
keeping more to the gutters and less to the walls than they had on the
previous day. Most of them were now holding sticks or bits of broken
wood with which they tapped their way along the curb. It made for easier
going than by the house fronts /with /their entrances and projections,
and the tapping had decreased the frequency of collisions.

We threaded our way with little difficulty, and after a time turned into
Store Street to see the University Tower at the end of it rising
straight before us.

?Steady,? said Josella as we turned into the empty road. ?I think
there?s something going on at the gates.? We parked the car and climbed
into an adjoining garden whence we could prospect discreetly.

Whatever was going on was right at the front. We managed to find a
slightly higher mound which gave us a view of the gates across the heads
of the crowd. On this side a man in a cap was talking volubly through
the bars. He did not appear to be making a lot of headway, for the part
taken in the conversation by the man on the other side of the gates
consisted almost entirely of negative headshakes.

?What is it?? Josella asked in a whisper.

I helped her up beside me. The talkative man turned so that we had a
glimpse of his profile. He was, I judged, about thirty, with a straight,
narrow nose and rather bony features.

What showed of his hair was dark, but it was the intensity of his manner
that was more noticeable than his appearance.

As the colloquy through the gates continued to get nowhere, his voice
became louder and more emphatic?though without visible effect on the
other. There could be no doubt that the man beyond the gates was able to
see; he was doing so watchfully, through born-rimmed glasses. A few
yards behind him stood a little knot of three more men about whom there
was equally little doubt. They, too, were regarding the crowd and its
spokesman with careful attention. The man on our side grew more heated.
His voice rose as if he were talking as much for the benefit of the
crowd as for those behind the railings.

?Now listen to me,? he said angrily. ?These people here have got just as
much bloody right to live as you have, haven?t they? It?s not their
fault they?re blind, is it? It?s nobody?s fault?but it?s going to be
your fault if they starve, and you know it.?

His voice was a curious mixture of the rough and the educated, so that
it was hard to place him?as though neither style seemed quite natural to
him, somehow.

?I?ve been showing them where to get food. I?ve been doing what I can
for them, but, Christ, there?s only one of me, and there?s thousands of
them. /You /could be showing ?em where to get food, too?but are
you??hell! What are you doing about it? Damn all, that?s what. Just look
after your own lousy skins. I?ve met your kind before. It?s ?Damn you,
Jack, I?m all right??that?s your motto.?

He spat with contempt and raised a long, oratorical arm.

?Out there,? he said, waving his hand toward London at large, ?out there
there are thousands of poor devils only wanting someone to show them how
to get the food that?s there for the taking. And you could do it. All
you?ve got to do is /show /them. But do you? Do you, you buggers? No, what
you do is shut yourselves in here and let them bloody well   starve when
each one of you could keep hundreds alive by    doing no more than
coming out and /showing /the poor sods where to get the grub. God
almighty, aren?t you people human??


The man?s voice was violent. He had a case to put, and he was putting it
passionately. I felt Josella?s hand unconsciously clutching my arm, and
I put my band over hers. The man on the far side of the gate said
something that was inaudible where we stood.

?How long?? shouted the man on our side. ?How in hell would I know how
long the food?s going to last? What I do know is that if bastards like
you don?t muck in and help, there ain?t going to be many left alive by
the time they come to clear this bloody mess up.? He stood glaring for a
moment. ?Fact of it is, you?re scared?seared to show ?em where the food
is. And why? Because the more these poor devils get to eat, the less
there?s going to be for your lot. That?s the way of it, isn?t it? That?s
the truth?if you had the guts to admit it.?

Again we failed to hear the answer of the other man; but, whatever it
was, it did nothing to mollify he speaker. He stared back grimly through
the gates for a moment. Then he said:

?All right?if that?s the way you want it!?

He made a lightning snatch between the bars and caught the other?s arm.
In one swift movement he dragged it through and twisted it. He grabbed
the hand of a blind man standing beside him and clamped it on the arm.

?Hang on there, mate,? he said, and jumped toward the main fastening of
the gates.

The man inside recovered from his first surprise. He struck wildly
through the bars behind him with his other hand. A chance swipe took the
blind man in the face. It made him give a yell and tighten his grip. The
leader of the crowd was wrenching at the gate fastening. At that moment
a rifle cracked. The bullet pinged against the railings and whirred off
on a ricochet. The leader checked suddenly, undecided. Behind him there
was an outbreak of curses and a scream or two. The crowd swayed back and
forth as though uncertain whether to run or to charge the gates. The
decision was made for them by those in the courtyard. I saw a
youngish-looking man tuck something under his arm, and I dropped down,
pulling Josella with me, as the clatter of a submachine gun began.

It was obvious that the shooting was deliberately high; nevertheless,
the rattle of it, and the whizz of glancing bullets, was alarming. One
short burst was enough to settle the matter. When we raised our heads
the crowd had lost entity and its components were groping their ways to
safer parts in all three possible directions. The leader paused only to
shout something unintelligible, then he turned away too. He made his way
northward up Malet Street, doing his best to rally his following behind him.

I sat where we /were /and looked at Josella. She looked thoughtfully
back at me and then down at the ground before her. It was some minutes
before either of us spoke.

?Well?? I asked at last.

She raised her head to look across the road, and then at the last
stragglers from the crowd pathetically fumbling their ways.

He was right,? she said. ?You know he was right, don?t you?? I nodded.

Yes, he was right. And yet he was quite wrong too. You see, there is no
?they? to come to clear up this mess? I?m quite sure of that now. It
won?t be cleared up. We could do as he says. We /could /show some,
though only some, of these people where there is food. We could do that
for a few days, maybe for a few weeks, but after that?what??

?It seems so awful, so callous

?If we face it squarely, there?s a simple choice,? I said. ?Either we
can set out to save what can be saved from the wreck?and that has to
include ourselves?or we can devote ourselves to stretching the lives of
these people a little longer. That is the most objective view I can take.

But I can see, too, that the more obviously humane course is also,
probably, the road to suicide. Should we spend our time in prolonging
misery when we believe that there is no chance of saving the people in
the end? Would that be the best use to make of ourselves??

She nodded slowly.

?Put like that, there doesn?t seem to be much choice, does there? And
even if we could save a few, which are we going to choose? And who are
/we /to choose? And how long could we do it, anyway??

?There?s nothing easy about this,? I said. ?I?ve no idea Ac what
proportion of semidisabled persons it may be possible for us to support
when we come to the end of easy supplies, but I don?t imagine it could
be very high.?

?You?ve made up your mind,? she said, glancing at me.

There might or might not have been a tinge of disapproval her voice.

?My dear,? I said, ?I don?t like this any more than you do. I?ve put the
alternatives badly before you. Do we help those who have survived the
catastrophe to rebuild some kind of life? Or do we make a moral gesture
which, on the /face /of it, can scarcely be more than a gesture? The
people across the road there evidently intend to survive.?

She dug her fingers into the earth and let the soil trickle out of her hand.

?I suppose you?re right,? she said. ?But you?re also right when you say
I don?t like it.?

?Our likes and dislikes as decisive factors have now pretty well
disappeared,? I suggested.

?Maybe, but I can?t help feeling that there must be something wrong
about anything that starts with shooting.?

He shot to miss?and it?s very likely he saved fighting,? I pointed out.

The crowd had all gone now. I climbed over the wall and helped Josella
down on the other side. A man at the gate opened it to let us in.

?How many of you?? he asked.

?Just the two of us. We saw your signal last night,? I told him.

?Okay. Come along, and we?ll find the Colonel,? he said, leading us
across the forecourt.

The man whom he called the Colonel had set himself up in a small room
not far from the entrance and intended, seemingly for the porters. He
was a chubby man just turned fifty or thereabouts. His hair was
plentiful but well-trimmed, and gray. His mustache matched it and looked
as if no single hair would dare to break the ranks. His complexion was
so pink, healthy, and fresh that it might have belonged to a much
younger man; his mind, I discovered later, had never ceased to do so. He
was sitting behind a table with quantities of paper arranged on it in
mathematically exact blocks and an unsoiled sheet of pink blotting paper
placed squarely before him.

/As /we came in he turned upon us, one after the other, an intense,
steady look, and held it a little longer than was necessary. I
recognized the technique. It is intended to convey that the user is a
percipient judge accustomed to taking summarily the measure of his man;
the receiver should feel that be now faces a reliable type with no
nonsense about him?or, alternatively, that he has been seen through and
had all his weaknesses noted. The right form of response is to return it
in kind and be considered a ?useful fella.? I did. The Colonel picked up
his pen.

?Your names, please??

We gave them.

?And addresses??


 ?In the present circumstances I fear they won?t be very useful,? I
said. ?But if you really feel you must have them?? We gave them too.

He murmured something about system, organization, and relatives, and
wrote them down. Age, occupation, and all the rest of it followed. He
bent his searching look upon us again, scribbled a note upon each piece
of paper and put them in a file.

?Need good men. Nasty business, this. Plenty to do here, though. Plenty.
Mr. Beadley?ll tell you what?s wanted,?

We came out into the ball again. Josella giggled.

?He forgot to ask for references in triplicate?but I gather we?ve got
the job,? she said.

Michael Beadley, when we discovered him, turned out to be in decided
contrast. He was lean, tall, broad-shouldered, and slightly stooping,
with something the air of an athlete run to books. In repose his face
took on an expression of mild gloom from the darkness of his large eyes,
but it was seldom that one had a glimpse of it in repose. The occasional
streaks of gray in his hair helped very little in judging his age. He
might have been anywhere between thirty-five and fifty. His obvious
weariness just then made an estimate still more difficult. By his looks,
he must have been up all night; nevertheless he greeted us cheerfully
and waved an introductory hand toward a young woman, who took down our
names again as we gave them.

?Sandra Telmont,? he explained. ?Sandra is our professional
remembrancer?continuity is her usual work, so we 4 regard it as
particularly thoughtful of Providence to contrive her presence here just
now.?

The young woman nodded to me and looked harder at Josella.

?We?ve met before,? she said thoughtfully. She glanced down at the pad
on her knee. Presently a faint smile passed across her pleasant, though
unexotic countenance,

?Oh yes, of course,? she said in recollection.

?What did I tell you? The thing clings like a flypaper,? Josella
observed to me.

?What?s this about?? inquired Michael Beadley.

I explained. He turned a more careful scrutiny on Josella.

She sighed.

?Please forget it,? she suggested. ?I?m a bit tired of living it down?

That appeared to surprise him agreeably.

?All right,? he said, and dismissed the matter with a nod.


He turned back to the table. ?Now to get on with things. You?ve seen
Jaques??

?If that is the Colonel who is playing at Civil Service, we have,? I
told him.
 He grinned.
  ?Got to know how we stand. Can?t get anywhere without
knowing your ration strength,? he said, in a fair imitation of
the Colonel?s manner. ?But it?s quite true, though,? he went
on. ?I?d better give you just a rough idea of how things stand.
Up to the present there are about thirty-five of us. All sorts.
We hope and expect that some more will come in during the
day. Out of those here now, twenty-eight can see. The others
are wives or husbands?and there are two or three children?
who cannot. At the moment the general idea is that we move
away from here sometime tomorrow if we can be ready in
time?to be on the safe side, you understand.?
  I nodded. ?We?d decided to get away this evening for the
same reason, I told him.
  ?What have you for transport??
  I explained the present position of the station wagon. ?We
were going to stock up today,? I added. ?So far we?ve practically
nothing except a quantity of anti-triffid gear.?
  He raised his eyebrows. The girl Sandra also looked at me
curiously.
  ?That?s a queer thing to make your first essential,? he
remarked.
  I told them the reasons. Possibly I made a bad job of it,
for neither of them looked much impressed. He nodded casually and went on:
  ?Well, if you?re coming in with us, here?s what I suggest
B ring in your car, dump your stuff, then drive off and swap
it for a good big truck. Then Oh, does either of you know anything about
doctoring?? he broke off to ask.
 We shook our heads.
 He frowned a little. ?That?s a pity. So far we?ve got no one
who does. It?ll surprise me if we?re not needing a doctor be-
fore long?and, anyway, we ought all of us to have inoculations. . .
Still, it?s not much good sending you two off on a medical supplies
scrounge. What about food and general stores? Suit you??
 He flipped through some pages on a clip, detached one of them and
handed it to me. It was headed No. 15, and below was a typed list of
canned goods, pots and pans, and some bedding.
  ?Not rigid,? he said, ?but keep reasonably close to it and we?ll avoid
too many duplications. Stick to best quality. With the food, concentrate
on value for bulk?I mean, even /if /corn flakes are your leading passion
in life, forget ?em. I suggest you keep to warehouses and big
wholesalers.? He took hack the list and scribbled two or three addresses
on it.

?Cans and packets are your food line?don?t get led away by sacks of
flour, for instance; there?s another part on that sort of stuff.? He
looked thoughtfully at Josella. Heavyish work, I?m afraid, but it?s the
most useful job we can give you at present. Do as much as you can before
dark. There?ll be a general meeting and discussion here about
nine-thirty this evening.?

As we turned to go:

?Got a pistol?? he asked.

?I didn?t think of it,? I admitted.

?Better?just in case. Quite effective simply fired into the air,? he
said. He took two pistols from a drawer in the table and pushed them
across. ?Less messy than that.? he added, with a look at Josella?s
handsome knife. ?Good scrounging to you.?


Even by the time we set out after unloading the station wagon we found
that there were still fewer people about than on the previous day. The
ones that were showed an inclination to get on the sidewalks at the
sound of the engine rather than to molest us.

The first truck to take our fancy proved useless, being filled with
wooden cases too heavy for us to remove. Our next find was luckier?a
five-tonner, almost new, and empty. We trans-shipped, and left the
station wagon to its fate.

At the first address on my list the shutters of the loading bay were
down, but they gave way without much difficulty to the persuasions of a
crowbar from a neighboring shop and rolled up easily. Inside, we made a
find. Three trucks stood backed up to the platform. One of them was
fully loaded with cases of canned meat.

?Can you drive one of these things?? I asked Josella.

She looked at it.

?Well, I don?t see why not. The general idea?s the same, isn?t it? And
there?s certainly no traffic problem.?

We decided to come back and fetch it later, and took the empty truck on
to another warehouse, where we loaded in parcels of blankets, rugs, and
quilts, and then went on farther to acquire a noisy miscellany of pots,
pans, caldrons, and kettles. When we had the truck filled we felt we bad
put in a good morning?s work on a job that was heavier than we had
thought. We satisfied the appetite it had given us at a small pub
hitherto untouched.

The mood which filled the business and commercial districts was
gloomy?though it was a gloom that still had more the style of a normal
Sunday or public holiday than of collapse. Very few people at all were
to be seen in those parts. Had the catastrophe come by day, instead of
by night after the workers had gone home, it would have been a hideously
different scene.

When we had refreshed ourselves we collected the already loaded truck
from the food warehouse and drove the two of them slowly and
uneventfully back to the university. We parked them in the forecourt
there and set off again. About six-thirty we returned once more with
another pair of well-loaded trucks and a feeling of useful accomplishment.

Michael Beadley emerged from the building to inspect our contributions.
He approved of it all save half a dozen cases that I had added to my
second load.

?What are they?? he asked.

?Triffid guns, and bolts for them,? I told him.

He looked at me thoughtfully.

?Oh yes. You arrived with a lot of anti-triffid stuff,? he remarked.

?I think it?s likely we?ll need it,? I said.

He considered. I could see that I was being put down as a bit unsound on
the subject of triffids. Most likely he was accounting for that by the
bias my job might be expected to give?aggravated by a phobia resulting
from my recent sting and wondering whether it might connote other,
perhaps less harmless, unsoundnesses.

?Look here,? I suggested, ?we?ve brought in four full truckloads between
us. I just want enough space in one of them for these cases. If you
think we cant spare that, I?ll go out and find a trailer, or another truck.?

?No, leave ?em where they are. They don?t take a lot of room,? he decided.

We went into the building and had some tea at an improvised canteen
which a pleasant-faced, middle-aged woman had competently set up there.

?He thinks.? I said to Josella, ?that I?ve got a bee in my bonnet over
triffids.?

?He?ll learn?I?m afraid,? she replied. ?It?s queer that no one else
seems to have seen them about.?

?These people have all been keeping pretty much to the center, so it?s
not very surprising. After all, we?ve seen none ourselves today.??

?Do you think they?ll come right down here among the streets??

?I couldn?t say. Maybe lost ones would.?

?How do you think they got loose?? she asked.

?If they worry? at a stake hard enough and long enough, it?ll usually
come in the end, The breakouts we used to get sometimes on the farms
were usually due to their all crowding up against one section of the
fence until it gave way.

?But couldn?t you make the fences stronger??

We could have done, but we didn?t want them fixed quite permanently. It
didn?t happen very often, ?and when it did it was usually simply from
one field to another, so we?d just drive them back and put up the fence
again. I don?t think any of them will intentionally make this way. From
a triffid point of view, a city must be much like a desert, so I should
think they?ll be moving outward toward the open country on the whole.
Have you ever used a triffid gun?? I added.

She shook her head.

After I?ve done something about these clothes, I was thin king of
putting in a bit of practice, it you?d like to try,? I suggested.

I got back an hour or so later, feeling more suitably clad as a result
of having infringed on her idea of a ski suit and heavy shoes, to find
that she had changed into a becoming dress of spring green. We took a
couple of the triffid guns and went out into the garden of Russell
Square, close by. We had spent about half an hour snipping the topmost
shoots off convenient bushes when a young woman in a brick-red lumber
jacket and an elegant pair of green trousers strolled across the grass
and leveled a small camera at us.

Who are you?the press?? inquired Josella.

?More or less,? said the young woman. ?At least, I?m the official
record. Elspeth Cary.?

?So soon?? I remarked. ?I trace the hand of our order-conscious Colonel.?

?You?re quite right,? she agreed. She turned to look at Josella. ?And
you are Miss Playton. I?ve often wondered??

Now look here,? interrupted Josella. ?Why should the one static thing in
a collapsing world be my reputation? Can?t we forget it??

?Jim,? said Miss Cary thoughtfully. ?Jib-huh.? She turned to another
subject. ?What?s all this about triffids?? she asked.

We told her.

?They think,? added Josella, ?that Bill here is either scary or scatty
on the subject.?

Miss Cary turned a straight look at me. Her face was interesting rather
than good-looking, with a complexion browned by stronger suns than ours.
Her eyes were steady, observant, and dark brown.

?Are you?? she asked.

?Well, I think they?re troublesome enough to be taken seriously when
they get out of hand,? I told her.

She nodded. ?True enough. I?ve been in places where they are out of
hand. Quite nasty. But in England?well, ifs hard to imagine that here.?

?There?ll not be a lot to stop them here now?,? I said.

Her reply, if she had been about to make one, was forestalled by the
sound of an engine overhead. We looked up and presently saw a helicopter
come drifting across the roof of the British Museum.

That?ll be Ivan,? said Miss Gary. ?He thought he might manage to find
one. I must go and get a picture of him landing. See you later.? And she
hurried off across the grass.

Josella lay down, clasped her hands behind her head, and gazed up into
the depths of the sky. When the helicopter?s engine ceased, things
sounded very much quieter than before we had heard it.

Josella lay facing upward with a faraway look in her eyes. I thought
perhaps I could guess something of what was passing in her mind, but I
said nothing. She did not speak for a little while, then she said:

You know, one of the most shocking things about it is to realize how
/easily /we have lost a world that seemed so safe and certain.?

She was quite right. It was that simplicity that seemed somehow to be
the nucleus of the shock. From very familiarity one forgets all the
forces which keep the balance, and thinks of security as normal. It is
not. I don?t think it had ever before occurred to me that man?s
supremacy is not primarily due to his brain, as most of the books would
have one think. It is due to the brain?s capacity to make use of the
information conveyed to it by a narrow band of visible light rays. His
civilization, all that he had achieved or might achieve, hung upon his
ability to perceive that range of vibrations from red to violet. Without
that, he was lost. I saw for a moment the true tenuousness of his hold
on his power, the miracles that he had wrought with such a fragile
instrument.


Josella had been pursuing her own line of thought.

?It?s going to be a very queer sort of world?what?s left of it. I don?t
think we?re going to like it a lot,? she said reflectively.

It seemed to me an odd view to take?rather as if one should protest that
one did not /like /the idea of dying or being born. I preferred the
notion of finding out first how it would be, and then doing what one
could about the parts of it one disliked most, but I let it pass.

