
Book 3
urface Tension

Prologue
Dr. Chatvieux took a long time over the microscope, leaving
la Ventura with nothing to do but look at the dead landscape
of Hydrot. Waterscape, he thought, would be a better word.space, the new world had shown only one small, trian-
gular continent, set amid endless ocean; and even the con-
tinent was mostly swamp.
The wreck of the seed-ship lay broken squarely across the
one real spur of rock which.Hydrot seemed to possess, which
reared a magnificent twenty-one feet above sea-level. From
this eminence, la Ventura could see forty miles to the horizon
across a flat bed of mud. The red light of the star Tau Ceti,
glinting upon  thousands  of small lakes, pools, ponds and
puddles, made the watery plain look like a mosaic of onyx
and ruby.
"If I were a religious man," the pilot said suddenly, "I'd
call this a plain case of divine vengeance."
Chatvieiix said: "Hmn?"
"It's as if we'd been struck down foris it hubris? Pride,
arrogance?"
"Hybris," Chatvieux said, looking up at last. "Well, is it?
I don't feel swollen with pride at the moment. Do you?"
."I'm not exactly proud of my piloting," la Ventura ad-
mitted. "But that isn't quite what I mean. I was thinking about

why we came here in the first place. It takes a lot of 'arro-
gance to think that you can scatter men, or at least things
very much like men, all over the face of the galaxy. It takesmore pride to do the jobto pack up all the equipment
and move from planet to planet and actually make men, make
them suitable for every place you touch."
"I suppose it does," Chatvieux said. "But we're only one of
several hundred seed-ships in this limb of the galaxy, so I
doubt that the gods picked us out as special sinners." He. "If they had, maybe they'd have left us our ultra-
phone, so the Colonization Council could hear about our
cropper. Besides, Paul, we don't make men. We adapt them
adapt them to Earthlike planets, nothing more than that.
We've sense enoughor humility enough, if you-tike-tfest"
betterto know that we can't adapt men to a planet like Ju-
piter, or to the surface of a sun, like Tau Ceti."
"Anyhow, we're here," la Ventura said grimly. "And we
aren't going to get off. Phil tells me that we don't even have
our germ-cell bank any more, so we can't seed this place in 
the usual way. We've been thrown onto a dead world and
dared to adapt to it. What are the pantropes going to do with
our recalcitrant carcassesprovide built-in waterwings?"
"No," Chatvieux said calmly. "You and I and all the rest
of us are going to die, Paul. Pantropic techniques don't work
on the body; that was fixed for you for life when you were
conceived. To attempt to rebuild it for you would only maim
you. The pantropes affect only the genes, the inheritance-
carrying factors. We can't give you built-in waterwings, any
more than we can give you a new set of brains. I think we'll
be able to populate this world with men, but we won't live to
see it."
The pilot thought about it, a lump of cold blubber collect-
, ing gradually in his stomach. "How long do you give us?" he
said at last.
"Who knows? A month, perhaps."
The bulkhead leading to the wrecked section of the ship
was pushed back, admitting salt, muggy air, heavy with carbon
dioxide. Philip Strasvogel, the communications officer, came
in, tracking mud. Like la Ventura, he was now a man without
a function, and it appeared to bother him. He was not well
equipped for introspection, and with his ultraphone totally
smashed, unresponsive to his perpetually darting hands, he
had been thrown back into his own mind, whose resources
were few. Only the tasks Chatvieux had set him to had pre-
vented him from setting like a gelling colloid into a perma-
nent state of the sulks.
He 'unbuckled from around his waist a canvas belt, into
the loops of which plastic vials were stuffed like cartridges.
"More samples. Doc," he said. "All alikewater, very wet.have some quicksand in one boot, too. Find anything?"
"A good deal, Phil. Thanks. Are the others around?"
Strasvogel poked his head out and hallooed. Other voices
rang out over the mudflats. Minutes later, the rest of the sur-
vivors of the crash were crowding into the pantrope deck:
Saltonstall, Chatvieux' senior assistant, a perpetually sanguine,
perpetually youthful technician willing to try anything once,
including dying; Eunice Wagner, behind whose placid face
rested the brains of the expedition's only remaining ecologist;
Eleftherios Venezuelos, the always-silent delegate from the
Colonization Council; and Joan Heath, a midshipman whose
duties, like la Ventura's and Phil's, were now without mean-
ing,  but whose bright head and tall, deceptively indolent
body shone to the pilot's eyes brighter than Tau Ceti
brighter, since the crash, even than the home sun.
Five men and two womento colonize a planet on which
"standing room" meant treading water.
They came in quietly and found seats or resting places on
the deck, on the edges of tables, in corners. Joan Heath went
to stand beside la Ventura. They did not look at each other,
but the warmth of her shoulder beside his was all that he
needed. Nothing was as bad as it seemed.
Venezuelos said: "What's the verdict, Dr. Chatvieux?"
"This place isn't dead," Chatvieux said. "There's life in the
sea and in the fresh water, both. On the animal side of the
ledger, evolution seems to have stopped with the Crustacea;
the most advanced form I've found is a tiny crayfish, from
one of the local rivulets, and it doesn't seem to be well dis-
tributed. The ponds and puddles are well-stocked with small
metazoans of lower orders, right up to the rotifersincluding
a castle-building genus like Earth's Floscularidae. In addi-
tion, there's a wonderfully variegated protozoan population,
with a dominant ciliate type much like Pammoecium, plusSarcodines, the usual spread of phyto-flagellates, and
even a phosphorescent species I wouldn't have expected to see
anywhere but in salt water. As for the plants, they run from
simple blue-green algae to quite advanced thallus-producing
typesthough none of them, of course, can live out of the
water."
"The sea is about the same," Eunice said. "I've found some
of the larger simple metazoansjellyfish and so onand
some crayfish almost as big as lobsters. But it's normal to find
QI
salt-water species running larger than fresh-water. Ana there's
the usual plankton and nannoplankton population."
"In short," Chatvieux said, "we'll survive hereif we
fight."
"Wait a minute," la Ventura said. "You've just finished tell-
ing me that we wouldn't survive. And you were talking about
us, the seven of us here, not about the genus man, because we
don't have our germ-cells banks any more. What's"
"We don't have the banks. But we ourselves can contribute
germ-cells, Paul. I'll get to that in a moment." Chatvieux
turned to Saltonstall, "Martin, what would you think of our
taking to the sea? We came out of it once, long ago; maybe
we could come out of it again on Hydrot."
"No good," Saltonstall said immediately. "I like the idea, but
I don't think this planet ever heard of Swinburne, or Homer,
either. Looking at it as a colonization problem alone, as if we
weren't involved in it ourselves, I wouldn't give you an Oc
dollar for epi oinopa ponton. The evolutionary pressure there
is too high, the competition from other species is prohibitive;
seeding the sea should be the last thing we attempt, not the
first. The colonists wouldn't have a chance to learn a thing
before they'd be gobbled up."
"Why?" la Ventura said. Once more, the death in his
stomach was becoming hard to placate.
"Eunice, do your sea-going Coelenterates include anything
like the Portuguese man-of-war?"
The ecologist nodded.
"There's your answer, Paul," Saltonstall said. "The sea is
out. It's got to be fresh water, where the competing creatures
are less formidable and there are more places to hide."
"We can't compete with a jellyfish?" la Ventura asked, swal-
lowing.
"No, Paul," Chatvieux said. "Not with one that dangerous.
The pantropes make adaptations, not gods. They take human
germ-cellsin this case, our own, since our bank was wiped
out in the crashand modify them genetically toward those
of creatures who can live in any reasonable environment. The
result will be manlike, and intelligent. It usually shows the' personality patterns, too, since the modifications are
usually made mostly in the morphology, not so much in the
mind, of the resulting individual.
"But we can't transmit memory. The adapted man is worse
than a child in the new environment. He has no history, no
techniques, no precedents, not even a language. In the usual
colonization project, like the Tellura affair, the seeding teams
more or less take him through elementary school before theythe planet to him, but we won't survive long enough to
give such instruction. We'll have to design our colonists with
plenty of built-in protections and locate them in the most fa-
vorable environment possible, so that at least some of them
will survive learning by experience alone."
The pilot thought about it, but nothing occurred to him
which did not make the disaster seem realer and more inti-
mate with each passing second. Joan Heath moved slightly
closer to him. "One of the new creatures can have my per-
sonality pattern, but it won't be able to remember being me.
Is that right?"
"That's right. In the present situation we'll probably make
our colonists haploid, so that some of them, perhaps many,
will have a heredity traceable to you alone. There may be
just the faintest of residuums of identitypantropy's given
us some data to support the old Jungian notion of ancestral
memory. But we're all going to die on Hydrot, Paul, as self-
conscious persons. There's no avoiding that. Somewhere we'll
leave behind people who behave as we would, think and feel
as we would, but who won't remember la Ventura, or Dr.
Chatvieux, or Joan Heathor the Earth."
The pilot said nothing more. There was a gray taste in his
mouth.
"Saltonstall, what would you recommend as a form?"
The pantropist pulled reflectively at his nose. "Webbed ex-
tremities, of course, with thumbs and big toes heavy and
thorn-like for defense until the creature has had a chance
to learn. Smaller external ears, and the eardrum larger and
closer to the outer end of the ear-canal. We're going to have
to reorganize the water-conservation system, I think; the glo-
merular kidney is perfectly suitable for living in fresh water,
but the business of living immersed, inside and out, for a
creature with a salty inside means that the osmotic pressure
inside is going to be higher than outside, so that the kidneys
are going to have to be pumping virtually all the time. Under
the circumstances we'd best step up production of urine, and
that means the antidiuretic function of the pituitary gland is
going to have to be abrogated, for all practical purposes."
"What about respiration?"
"Hm," Saltonstall said. "I suppose book-lungs, like some of
the arachnids have. They can be supplied by intercostal
spiracles. They're gradually adaptable to atmosphere-breath-
ing, if our colonist ever decides to come out of the water. Just
to provide for that possibility. I'd suggest that the nose be re-
tamed, maintaining the nasal cavity as a part of the otologi-
cal system, but cutting off the cavity from the larynx with aof cells that are supplied with oxygen by direct
irrigation, rather than by the circulatory system. Such a mem-
brane wouldn't survive for many generations, once the crea-
ture took to living out of the water even for part of its life-
time; it'd go through two or three generations as an amphib-
ian,  and''then one day it'd suddenly find itself breathing
through its larynx again."
"Ingenious," Chatvieux said.'
"Also, Dr. Chatvieux, I'd suggest that we have it adopt
spOTulation. As an aquatic animal, our colonist is going to
have an indefinite life-span, but we'll have to give it a breed-
ing cycle of about six weeks to keep up its numbers duringlearning period; so there'll have to be a definite oreak of
some duration in its active year. Otherwise it'll hit the popu-
lation problem before it's learned enough to cope with it."
"And it'd be better if our colonists could winter over in-
side a good, hard shell," Eunice Wagner added in agreement.
"So sporulation's the obvious answer. Many other microscopic
creatures have it."
"Microscopic?" Phil said incredulously.
"Certainly," Chatvieux said, amused. "We can't very well
crowd a six-foot man into a two-foot puddle. But that raises
a question. We'll have tough competition from the rotifers,
and some of them aren't strictly microscopic; for that matter
even some of the protozoa can be seen with the naked eye,
just barely, with dark-field illumination. I don't think your
average colonist should run much under 250 microns, Sal-
tonstall. Give them a chance to slug it out."
"I was thinking of making them twice that big."
"Then they'd be the biggest animals in their environment,"
Eunice Wagner pointed out, "and won't ever develop any
skills.  Besides,  if you make them about rotifer size, it will
give them an incentive for pushing out the castle-building
rotifers, and occupying the castles themselves, as dwellings."
Chatvieux nodded. "All right, let's get started. While the
pantropes are being calibrated, the rest of us can put our
heads together on leaving a record for these people. We'll
micro-engrave the record on a set of corrosion-proof metal
leaves, of a size our colonists can handle conveniently. We can
tell them, very simply, what happened, and plant a few sug-
gestions that there's more to the universe than what they find
in their puddles. Some day they may puzzle it out."
"Question," Eunice Wagner said. "Are we going to tell them
they're microscopic? I'm opposed to it. It may saddle their
entire early history with a gods-and-demons mythology that'd be better off without."
94
"Yes, we are," Chatvieux said; and la Ventura could tell by
the change in the tone of his voice that he was speaking now
as their senior on the expedition. "These people will be of the
race of men, Eunice. We want them to win their way back into
the community of men. They are not toys, to be protected
from the truth forever in a fresh-water womb."
"Besides," Saltonstall observed, "they won't get the record
translated at any time in their early history. They'll have 'to
develop a written language of their own, and it will be im-for us to leave them any sort of Rosetta Stone or
other key. By the time they can decipher the truth, they
should be ready for it."
"I'll make that official," Venezuelos said unexpectedly. And
that was that.
And then, essentially, it was all over. They contributed
the cells that the pantropes would need. Privately, la Ventura
and Joan Heath went to Chatvieux and asked to contribute
jointly; but the scientist said that the microscopic men were to
be haploid, in order to give them a minute cellular structure,
with nuclei as small as Earthly rickettsiae, and thereforeperson had to give germ-cells individuallythere would
be no use for zygotes. So even that consolation was denied
them; in death they would have no children, but be in-
stead as alone as ever.
They helped, as far as they could, with the text of the
message which was to go on the metal leaves. They had their
personality patterns recorded. They went through the mo-
tions.  Already they were beginning to be hungry; the sea-
crayfish, the only things on Hydrot big enough to eat, livedwater too deep and cold for subsistence fishing.
After la Ventura had Set his control board to rightsa
useless gesture, but a habit he had been taught to respect, and
which in an obscure way made things a little easier to bear
he was out of it. He sat by himself at the far end of the rock, watching Tau Ceti go redly down, chucking pebbles
into the nearest pond.
After a while Joan Heath came silently up behind him, and
sat down too. He took her hand. The glare of the red sun
was almost extinguished now, and together they watched it
go, with la Ventura, at least, wondering somberly which
nameless puddle was to be his Lethe.
He never found out, of course. None of them did.
Cycle One
In a forgotten comer of the galaxy, the watery world of Hy-
drot hurtles endlessly  around the red star, Tau Ceti. For
many months its single small continent has been snowbound,
and the many pools and lakes which dot the continent have
been locked in the grip of the ice. Now, however, the red sun
swings closer and closer to the zenith in Hydrot's sky; the
snow rushes in torrents toward the eternal ocean, and the ice
recedes toward the shores of the lakes and ponds . . .

The first thing to reach the consciousness of the sleeping
Lavon was a small, Intermittent scratching sound. This was
followed by a disquieting sensation in his body, as if the
worldand Lavon with itwere being rocked back and forth.
He stirred uneasily, without opening his eyes. His vastly
slowed metabolism made him feel inert and queasy, and the
rocking did not help. At his slight motion, however, both theand the motion became more insistent.
It seemed to take days for the fog over his brain to clear,
but whatever was causing the disturbance would not let him
rest. With a groan he forced his eyelids open and made an
abrupt gesture with one webbed hand. By the waves of phos-
phorescence which echoed away from his fingers at the motion,
he could see that the smooth amber walls of his spherical
shell were unbroken. He tried to peer through them, but hesee nothing but darkness outside. Well, that was nat-
ural;  the  amnionic  fluid  inside  the  spore would  generate
light, but ordinary water did not, no matter how vigorously
it was stirred.
Whatever was outside the sphere was rocking it again, with
the same whispering friction against its shell. Probably some
nosey diatom, Lavon thought sleepily, trying to butt its way
through an object it Was too stupid to go around. Or some
early hunter, yearning for a taste of the morsel inside the
spore. Well, let it worry itself; Lavon had no intention of
breaking the shell just yet. The fluid in which he had slept
for so many months had held his body processes static, and
had slowed his mind. Once out into the water, he would have
to start breathing and looking for food again, and he couldby the unrelieved darkness outside that it was too early
in the spring to begin thinking about that.
He flexed his fingers reflectively, in the disharmonic motion
from little finger to thumb that no animal but man can copy,
and watched the widening wavefronts of greenish light re-
bound in larger arcs from the curved spore walls. Here he was,
curled up quite comfortably in a little amber ball, where he
could stay until even the depths were warm and light. At this
moment there was probably still some ice on the sky, and
certainly there would not be much to eat as yet. Not that
there was ever much, what with the voracious rotifers coming
awake too with the first gust of warm water
The rotifers I That was it. "There was a plan afoot to drive
them out. Memory returned in an unwelcome rush. As if to
help it, the spore rocked again. That was probably one of the, trying to awaken him; nothing man-eating ever came
to the Bottom this early. He had left an early call with the
Paras, and now the time had come, as cold and early and
dark as he had thought he wanted it.
Reluctantly, Lavon uncurled, planting his webbed toes
and arching his backbone as hard as he could, pressing with
his whole body against his amber prison. With small, sharp,
crepitating sounds, a network of cracks raced through the
translucent shell.
Then the spore wall dissolved into a thousand brittle shards,
and he was shivering violently with the onslaught of the icy
water. The warmer fluid of his winter cell dissipated silently,
a faint glowing fog. In the brief light he saw, not far from
him, a familiar shape: a transparent, bubble-filled cylinder, a
colorless slipper of jelly, spirally grooved, almost as long as
he was tall. Its surface was furred with gently vibrating fine
hairs, thickened at the base.
The light went out. The Proto said nothing; it waited while
Lavon choked and coughed, expelling the last remnants of the
spore fluid from his book-lungs and sucking in the pure, ice-
cold water.
"Para?" Lavon said at last. "Already?"
"Already," the invisible cilia vibrated in even, emotionless
tones. Each separate hair-like process buzzed at an independ-
ent, changing rate; the resulting sound waves spread through
the water, intermodulating, reinforcing or cancelling each
other. The aggregate wave-front, by the time it reached human
ears, was rather eerie, but nevertheless recognizable human
speech. "This is the time, Lavon."
'Time and more than time," another voice said from the
returned darkness. "If we are to. drive Flosc from his castles."
"Who's that?" Lavon said, turning futilely toward 'the new
voice.
"I am Para also, Lavon. We are sixteen since the awaten-
ing. If you could reproduce as rapidly as we"
"Brains are better than numbers," Lavon said. "As the Eat-
ers will find out soon enough."
"What shall we do, Lavon?"
The man drew up his knees and sank to the cold mud of
the .Bottom to think. Something wriggled tinder his buttocks
and a tiny spirillum corkscrewed away, identifiable only by
feel. He let it go; he was not hungry yet, and he had the Eat-rotifersto think about. Before long they would be
swarming in the upper reaches of the sky, devouring every-
thing, even men when they could catch them, even their nat-
ural enemies the Protos now and then. And whether or not
the Protos could be organized to battle them was a question
still to be tested.
Brains are better than numbers; even that, as a proposition,
was still to be tested. "The Protos, after all, were intelligent
after their fashion; and they knew their world, as the men did
not. Lavon could still remember how hard it had been for
him to get straight in his head the various clans of beings in
this world, and to make sense of their confused names; his
tutor Shar had drilled him unmercifully until it had begun to
penetrate.
When you said "Man," you meant creatures that, generally
speaking, looked alike. The bacteria were of three kinds, the
rods and the globes and the spirals, but they were all tiny
and edible, so he had learned to differentiate them quickly.
When it came to the Protos, identification became a real prob-
lem. Para here was a Proto, but he certainly looked very dif-
ferent from Stent and his family, and the family of Didin
was unlike both. Anything, as it turned out, that was not green
and had a visible nucleus was a Proto, no matter how strange
its shape might be. The Eaters were all different, too, and some
of them were as beautiful as the fruiting crowns of water-; but all of them were deadly, and all had the whirling
crown of cilia which could suck you into the incessantly
grinding mastex in a moment. Everything which was green
and had an engraved shell of glass, Shar had called a diatom,
dredging the strange word as he dredged them all from some
Bottom in his skull which none of the rest of them could
reach, and even Shar could not explain.
Lavon arose quickly. "We need Shar," he said. "Where is
his spore?"
"On a plant frond, far up near the sky."
Idiot! The old man would never think of safety. To sleep
near the sky, where he might be snatched up and borne off by
any Eater to chance by when he emerged, sluggish with win-
ter's long sleep! How could a wise man be so foolish?
"We'll have to hurry. Show me the way."
"Soon; wait," one of the Paras said. "You cannot see. Noc
is foraging nearby." There was a small stir in the texture of
the 'darkness as the swift cylinder shot away.
"Why do we need Shar?" the other Para said.
"For his brains, Para. He is a thinker."
"But his thoughts are water. Since he taught the Protos
man's language, he has forgotten to think of the Eaters. He
thinks forever of the mystery of how man came here. It is a
mysteryeven the Eaters are not like maa. But understand-
ing it will not help us to live."
Lavon turned blindly toward the creature. "Para, tell me
something. Why do the Protos side with us? With man, I
mean? Why do you need us? The Eaters fear you."
There was a short silence. When the Para spoke again, the
vibrations of its voice were more blurred than before, more
even, more devoid of any understandable feeling.
"We live in this world," the Para said. "We are of it. We
rule it. We came to that state long before the coming of men,long warfare with the Eaters. But we think as the Eaters
do, we do not plan, we share our knowledge and we exist
Men plan; men lead; men are different from each other; men
want to remake the world. And they hate the Eaters, as we
do. We will help."
"And give up your rule?"
"And give it up, if the rule of men is better. That is reason.
Now we can go; Noc is coming back with light."
Lavon looked up. Sure enough, there was a brief flash of
cold light far overhead, and then another. In a moment the
spherical Proto had dropped into view, its body flaring reg-
ularly with blue-green pulses. Beside it darted the second
Para.
"Noc brings news," the second Para said. "Para is twenty-
four. The Syn are awake by thousands along the sky. Nocto a Syn colony, but they will not help us; they all ex-
pect to be dead before the Eaters awake."
"Of course," said the first Para. "That always happens. And
the Syn are plants; why should they help the Protos?"
"Ask Noc if he'll guide us to Shar," Lavon said impatiently.
The Noc gestured with its single short, thick tentacle. One
of the Paras said, "That is what he is here for."
"Then let's go. We've waited long enough."
The mixed quartet soared away from the Bottom' through
the liquid darkness.
"No," Lavon snapped. "Not a second longer. The Syn are
awake, and Nothoica of the Eaters is due right after that.
You know that as well as I do, Shar. Wake upl"
"Yes, yes," the old man said fretfully. He stretched and
yawned. "You're always in such a hurry, Lavon. Where's Phil?
He made his spore near mine." He pointed to a still-unbroken
amber sphere sealed to a leaf of the water-plant one tier. "Better push him off; he'll be safer on the Bottom."
"He would never reach the Bottom," Para said. "The ther-
mocline has formed."
Shar looked surprised. "It has? Is it as late as all that? Wait
while I get my records together." He began to search along
the leaf in the debris and the piled shards of his spore. Lavon
looked impatiently about, found a splinter of stonewort, and
threw it heavy end first at the bubble of Phil's cell just below.
The spore shattered promptly, and the husky young man tum-
bled out, blue with shock as the cold water hit him.
"Woughl" he said. "Take it easy, Lavon." He looked up.
"The old man's awake? Good. He insisted on staying up here
for the winter, so of course I had to stay too."
"Aha," Shar said, and lifted a thick metal plate about the
length of his forearm and half as wide. "Here is one of them.
Now if only I haven't misplaced the other"
Phil kicked away a mass of bacteria. "Here it is. Better give
them both to a Para, so they won't burden you. Where do we
go from here, Lavon? It's dangerous up this high. I'm just
glad a Dicran hasn't already shown up."
"I here," something droned just above them.
Instantly, without looking up, Lavon flung himself out and
down into the open water, turning his head to look back over
his shoulder only when he was already diving as fast as he
could go. Shar and Phil had evidently sprung at the same. On the next frond above where Shar had spent his
winter was the armored, trumpet-shaped body of the rotifer
Dicran, contracted to leap after them.
The two Protos came curving back out of nowhere. At the
same moment, the bent, shortened body of Dicran flexed in
its  armor plate,  straightened,  came plunging toward them.
There was a soft plop and Lavon found himself struggling in
a fine net, as tangled and impassible as the matte of a lichen.
A second such sound was followed by a muttered imprecation
from Phil. Lavon struck out fiercely, but he was barely able
to wriggle in the web of wiry, transparent stuff.
"Be still," a voice which he recognized as Para's throbbed
behind him. He managed to screw his head around, and then
kicked himself mentally for not having realized at once what
had happened. The Paras had exploded the trichocysts which
lay like tiny cartridges beneath their pellicles; each one cast
forth a liquid which solidified upon contact with the water in
a long slender thread. It was their standard method of
defense.
Farther down, Sharand Phil drifted with the second Para
in the heart of a white haze, like creatures far gone in mold.
Dicran swerved to avoid it, but she was evidently unable to
give up; she twisted and darted around them, her corona
buzzing harshly, her few scraps of the human language for-
gotten. Seen from this distance, the rotation of the corona
was revealed as an illusion, created by the rhythm of pulsa-
tion of the individual cilia, but as far as Lavon was con-
cerned the point was solely technical and the distance was far
too short. Through the transparent armor Lavon could also
see the great jaws of Dicran's mastax, grinding away me-
chanically at the fragments which poured into her unheeding
mouth.
High above them all, Noc circled indecisively, illuminating
the whole group with quick, nervous flashes of his blue light.
He was a flagellate, and had no natural weapons against the
rotifer; why he was, hanging around drawing attention toLavon could not imagine.
Then, suddenly, he saw the reason: a barrel-like creature
about Noc's size, ringed with two rows of cilia and bearing a
ram-like prow.  "Didin!" he shouted, unnecessarily. "This
way!"
The Proto swung gracefully toward them and seemed to
survey them, though it was hard to tell how he could see
them without eyes. The Dicran saw him at the same time and
began to back slowly away, her buzzing rising to a raw
snarl. She regained the plant and crouched down.
For an instant Lavon thought she was going to give up, but
experience should have told him that she lacked the sense.
Suddenly the lithe, crouched body was in full spring again,
this  time  straight  at  Didin.  Lavon yelled  an incoherent
warning.
The Proto didn't need it. The slowly cruising barrel darted
to one side and then forward, with astonishing speed. If he
could sink that poisoned seizing-organ into a weak point in
the rotifer's armor
Noc mounted higher to keep out of the way of the two
fighters, and in the resulting weakened light Lavon could not
see what was happening, though the furious chumirig of theand the buzzing of the Dicran continued.
After a while the sounds seemed to be retreating; Lavon
crouched in the gloom inside the Para's net, listening intently.
Finally there was silence.
"What's happened?" he whispered tensely.
"Didin does not say."
More eternities went by. Then the darkness began to wane
as Noc dropped cautiously toward them.
"Noc, where did they go?"
Noc signaled with his tentacle and turned on his axis
toward Para. "He says he lost sight of them. Wait1 hear
Didin."
Lavon could hear nothing; what the Para "heard" was
some one of thesemi-telepathic impulses which made up the
Proto's own language.
"He says Dioran is dead."
"Good! Ask him to bring the body back here."was a short silence. "He says he will bring it. What
good is a dead rotifer, Lavon?"
"You'll see," Lavon said. He watched anxiously until Didin
glided backwards into the lighted area, his poisonous ramdeep into the flaccid body of the rotifer, which, after
the delicately-organized fashion of its kind, was already b&-
ginning to disintegrate.
"Let me out of this net, Para."
The Proto jerked sharply for a fraction of a turn on its
long axis, snapping the threads off at the base; the movement
had to be made with great precision, or its pellicle would tear
as well. The tangled mass rose gently with the current and
drifted off over the abyss.
Lavon swam forward and, seizing one buckled edge of
Dicran's armor, tore away a huge strip of it. His hands
plunged into the now almost shapeless body and came out
again holding two dark spheroids: eggs.
"Destroy these, Didin," he ordered. The Proto obligingly
slashed them open.
"Hereafter," Lavon said, "that's to be standard procedure
with every Eater you kill."
"Not the males," one of the Para pointed out.
"Para, you have no sense of humor. All right, not the males
but nobody kills the males anyhow, they're harmless." He
looked down grimly at the inert mass. "Rememberdestroyeggs. Killing the beasts isn't enough. We want to wipe out
the whole race."
"We never forget," Para said emotionlessly.band of over two hundred humans, with Lavon and Shar
and a Para at its head, fled swiftly through the warm, light
waters of the upper level. Each man gripped a wood splinter,
or a fragment of lime chipped from stonewort, as a club; and
two hundred pairs of eyes darted watchfully from side to
side. Cruising over them was a squadron of twenty Didins,
and the rotifers they encountered only glared at them from
single red eyespots, making no move to attack. Overhead,
near the sky, the sunlight was filtered through a thick layer of
living creatures, fighting and feeding and spawning, so that
all the depths below were colored a rich green. Most of this
heavily populated layer was made up of algae and diatoms,
and there the Eaters fed unhindered. Sometimes a dying
diatom dropped slowly past the army.
The spring was well advanced; the two hundred, Lavon
thought, probably represented all of the humans who had
survived the winter. At least no more could be found. The
othersnobody would ever know how manyhad awakened
too late in the season, or had made 'their spores in exposed
places, and the rotifers had snatched them up. Of the group,
more than a third were women. That meant that in another
forty days, if they were unmolested, they could double the
size of their army.
If they were unmolested. Lavon grilmed and pushed an
agitated colony of Eudorina out of his way. The phrase re-
minded him of a speculation Shar had brought forth last
year: If Para were left unmolested, the oldster had said,
he could reproduce fast enough to fill this whole universe
with a solid mass of Paras before the season was out. Nobody,
of course, ever went unmolested in this world; nevertheless,
Lavon meant to cut the odds for people considerably below
anything that had heretofore been thought of as natural.
His hand flashed up, and down again. The darting squad-
rons plunged after him. "The light on the sky faded rapidly,
and after a while Lavon began to feel slightly chilly. He
signaled again. Like dancers, the two hundred swung their
bodies in mid-flight, plunging now feet first toward the Bot-
tom. To strike the thermocline in this position would make
their passage through it faster, getting them out of the upper
level where every minute, despite the convoy of Protos, con-
centrated danger.
irn
Lavon's feet struck a yielding surface, and with a splash he
was over his head in icy water. He bobbed up again, feeling
the icy division drawn across his shoulders. Other splashes
began to sound all along the thermocline as the army struck
it,  although,  since there was water above and below, Lavon
could not see the actual impacts.
Now they would have to wait until their body temperatures
fell.  At this dividing line of the universe, the warm water
ended and the temperature dropped rapidly, so that the water
below was much denser and buoyed them up. The lower
level of cold reached clear down to the Bottoman area
which the rotifers, who were not very clever, seldom managed
to enter.
A moribund diatom drifted down beside Lavon, the green-
ish-yellow of its body fading to a sick orange, its beautifully-
marked, oblong, pillbox-like shell swarming with greedy
bacteria. It came to rest on the thermocline, and the trans-
parent caterpillar tread of jelly which ran around it moved
feebly, trying vainly to get traction on the sliding water inter-
face. Lavon reached out a webbed hand and brushed away aof vibrating rods which had nearly forced its way into
the shell through a costal opening.
"Thank . . ." the diatom said, in an indistinct, whispering
voice. And again, "Thank . . . Die . . ." The gurgling whisper
faded. The caterpillar tread shifted again, then was motion-
less.
"It is right," a Para said. "Why do you bother with those
creatures? They are stupid. Nothing can be done for them."
Lavon did not try to explain. He felt himself sinking slow-
ly, and the water about his trunk and legs no longer seemed
cold, only gratefully cool after the stifling heat of that he
was breathing. In a moment the cool still depths had closed
over his head. He hovered until he was reasonably sure that
all the rest of his army was safely through, and the long
ordeal of search for survivors in the upper level really ended.
Then he twisted and streaked for the Bottom, Phil and Parahim, Shar puffing along with the vanguard.
A stone loomed; Lavon surveyed it in the half-light
Almost immediately he saw what he had hoped to see: the
sand-built house of a caddis-worm, clinging to the mountain-
ous slopes of the rock. He waved in his special cadre and
pointed.
Cautiously the men spread out in a U around the stone, the
mouth of the U facing the same way as the opening of the's masonry tube. A Noc came after them, drifting like a
star-shell above the peak; one of the Paras approached the
door of the worm's house, buzzing defiantly. Under cover of
this challenge the men at the back of the U settled on the
rock and began to creep forward. The house was three times
as tall as they were; the slimy black sand grains of which it
was composed were as big as their heads.
There was a stir inside, and after a moment the ugly head
of the worm peered out, weaving uncertainly at the buzzing
Para which had disturbed it. The Para drew back, and the
worm, in a kind of blind hunger, followed it. A sudden lunge
brought it nearly halfway out of its tube.
Lavon shouted. Instantly the worm was surrounded by a
howling horde of two-legged demons, who beat and prodded
it mercilessly with fists and clubs. Somehow it made a sound,
a kind of bleat as unlikely as the bird-like whistle of a fish,
and began to slide backwards into its homebut the rear
guard had already broken in back there. It jerked forward
again, lashing from side to side under the flogging.
There was only one way now for the great larva to go,
and the demons around it kept it going that way. It fell
toward the Bottom down the side of the rock, naked and
ungainly, shaking its blind head and bloating.
Lavon sent five Didin after it. They could not kill it, for it
was far too huge to die under their poison, but they could
sting it hard enough to keep it travelling. Otherwise, it would
be almost sure to return to the rock to start a new house.
Lavon settled on an abutment and surveyed his prize with
satisfaction. It was more than big enough to hold his entire
clana great tubular hall, easily defended once the breach
in the rear wall was rebuilt, and well out of the usual hauntsthe Eaters. The muck the caddis-worm had left behind
would have to be cleaned up, guards posted, vents knocked
out to keep the oxygen-poor water of the depths in motion
inside. It was too bad that the amoebae could not be detailed
to scavenge the place, but Lavon knew better than to issue
such an order. The Fathers of the Protos could not be asked
to do useful work; that had been made very clear.
He looked around at his army. They were standing around
him in awed silence, looking at the spoils of their attack upon
the largest creature in the world. He did not think they
would ever again feel as timid toward the Eaters. He stood
up quickly.
"What are you gaping at?" he shouted. "It's yours, all of it.
Get to work!"
Old Shar sat comfortably upon a pebble which had been
hoUowed out and cushioned with spirogyra straw. Lavon
stood nearby at the door, looking out at the maneuvers of his
legions.  They  numbered  more  than  three  hundred  now,
thanks to the month of comparative quiet which they had
enjoyed in the great hall, and they handled their numbers
well in the aquatic drill which Lavon had invented for them.
"They swooped and turned above the rock, breaking and re-
assembling their formations, fighting a sham battle with in-
visible opponents whose shape they could remember only too
well.
"Noc says there's all kinds of quarreling going on among
the Eaters," Shar said. "They didn't believe we'd joined with
the Protos at first, and then they didn't believe we'd alltogether to capture the hall. And the mass raid we
had last week scared them. They'd never tried anything of
the kind before, and they knew it wouldn't fail. Now they're
fighting with each other over why it did. Cooperation is
something new to this world, Lavon; it's making history."
"History?" Lavon said, following his drilling squadrons
with a technical eye. "What's that?"
"These." The old man leaned over one arm of the pebble
and touched the metal plates which were always with him.
Lavon turned to follow the gesture, incuriously. He knew the
plates well enoughthe pure uncorroded shining, graven
deeply on both sides with characters no-one, not even Shar,
could read. The Protos called the plates Not-staffneither
wood nor flesh nor stone.
"What good is that? I can't read it. Neither can you."
"I've got a start, Lavon. I know the plates are written in
our language. Look at the first word: ha ii ss tub oh or ee
exactly the right number of characters for 'history'. That
can't be a coincidence. And the next two words have to be
'of the'. And going on from there, using just the Characters I
already know" Shar bent and traced in the sand with a
stick a new train of characters: illerstel I or   el I elition.
"What's that?"
"It's a start, Lavon. Just a start.  Some day we'll have
more."
Lavon shrugged. "Perhaps, when we're safer. We can't
afford to worry about that kind of thing now. We've never
had that kind of time, not since the First Awakening."
The old man frowned down at the characters in the sand.
"The First Awakening. Why does everything seem to stop
there? I can remember in the smallest detail nearly everything
that happened to me since then. But what happened to our
childhoods,  Lavon? None of us who survived the First
Awakening seems to have had one. Who were our parents?
Why were we so ignorant of the world, and yet grown men
and women, all of us?"
"And the answer is in the plates?"
"I hope so," Shar said. "I believe it is. But I don't know.
The plates were beside me in the spore at the First Awaken-
ing. That's all I know about them, except that there's nothing
else like them in the world. The rest is deduction, and I
haven't gotten very far with it. Some day . . . some day."
"I hope so too," Lavon said soberly. "I don't mean to mock,
Shar, or to be impatient. I've got questions, too; we all have.
But we're going to have to put them off for a while. Suppose
we never find the whole answer?"
"Then our children will."
"But there's the heart of the problem, Shar: we have to
live to have children. And make the kind of a world in
which they'll have time to study. Otherwise"
Lavon broke off as a figure darted between the guards at
the door of the hall and twisted to a halt
"What news, lhil?"
"The same," Phil said, shrugging with his whole body. His
feet touched the floor. "The Flosc's castles are going up all
along the bar; they'll be finished with them soon, and then
we won't dare to get near them. Do you still Mnic you can
drive them out?"
Lavon nodded.
"But why?"
"First, for effect. We've been on the defensive so far, even
though we've made a good job of it. We'll have to follow
that up with an attack of our own if we're going to keep the
Eaters confused. Second, the castles Flosc builds are all
' tunnels and exits and entrancesmuch better than worm-
houses for us. I hate to think of what would have happened
if the Eaters had thought of blockading us inside this hall.
And we need an outpost in enemy country, Phil, where there
are Eaters to kill."
"This is enemy country," Phil said. "Stephanost is a
Bottom-dweller."
"But she's only a trapper, not a hunter. Any time we want
to kill her, we can find her right where we left her last. It's
the leapers like Dicran and Nothoica, the swimmers like
Rotar, the colony-builders like Flosc that we have to wipe
out first."
"Then we'd better start now, Lavon. Once the castles are
finished"
"Yes. Get your squads together, Phil. Shar, come on; we're
leaving the hall."
"To raid the castles?"
"Of course."
Shar picked up his plates.
"You'd better leave those here; they'll be in your way in
the fighting."
"No," Shar said determinedly. "I don't want them out of
my sight. They go along."

Vague forebodings, all the more disturbing because he had
felt nothing quite like them ever before, passed like clouds of
fine silt through Lavon's mind as the army swept away from
the hall on the Bottom and climbed toward the thermocline.
As far as he could see, everything seemed to be going as he
had planned it. As the army moved, its numbers were
swelled by Protos who darted into its ranks from all sides.
Discipline was good; and every man was armed with a long,
seasoned splinter, and from each belt swung a. stonewort-
flake hand-axe, held by a thong run through a hole Shar had
taught them all how to drill. There would probably be much
death before the light of today faded, but death was common
enough on any day, and this time it should heavily disfavor
the Eaters.
But there was a chill upon the depths that Lavon did not
like, and a suggestion of a current in the water which was
unnatural below the thermocline. A great many days had
been consumed in collecting the army, recruiting from
stragglers, and in securing the hall. The intensive breeding
which had followed, and the training of the new-born and
the newly recruited, had taken still more time, all of it es-
sential,  but  all  irrevocable.  If  the  chill  and  the current
marked the beginning of the fall turnover . . .
If it did, nothing could be done about it. The turnover
could no more be postponed than the coming of day or night.signaled to the nearest Para.
The glistening torpedo veered toward him. Lavon pointed
up.
"Here comes the thermocline, Para. Are we pointed right?"
"Yes, Lavon. That way is the place where the Bottom rises
toward the sky. Flosc's castles are on the other side, where
she will not see us."
"The sand bar that runs out from the north. Right. It's
getting warmer. Here we go."
Lavon felt his flight suddenly quicken, as if he had been
shot like a seed from some invisible thumb and forefinger.
He looked over his shoulder to watch the passage of the
rest through the temperature barrier, and what he saw thrilled
him as sharply as any awakening. Up to now he had had no
clear picture of the size of his forces, or the three-dimen-
sional beauty of their dynamic, mobile organization. Even
the Protos had fitted themselves into the squads; pattern after
pattern of power came soaring after Lavon from the Bottom:
first a single Noc bowling along like a beacon to guide all
the rest, then an advance cone of Didin to watch for in-
dividual Eaters who might flee to give the alarm, and then
the men, and the Protos, who made up the main force, in
tight  formations  as  beautiful  as  the elementary geometry
from which Shar had helped derive them.
The sand-bar loomed ahead, as vast as any mountain range.
Lavon soared sharply upward, and the tumbled, raw-boned
boulders of the sand grains swept by rapidly beneath him in
a broad, stony flood. Far beyond the ridge, towering up to
the  sky through glowing  green  obscurity, were the be-
fronded stems of the plant jungle which was their objective.
It was too dim with distance to allow him to see the clinging
castles of the Flosc yet, but he knew that the longest part
of the march was over. He narrowed his eyes and cleft the
sunlit waters with driving, rapid strokes of his webbed hands
and feet. The invaders poured after him over the crest of the
bar in an orderly torrent.
Lavon swung his arm in a circle. Silently, the following
squadrons glided into a great paraboloid, its axis pointed atjungle. The castles were visible now; until the formation
of the army, they had been the only products of close co-
operation that this world had ever seen. They were built of
single brown tubes, narrow at the base, attached to eachin a random pattern in a-n ensemble as delicate as a
branching coral. In the mouth of each tube was a rotifer, a
Flosc,  distinguished  from  other  Eaters  by  the  four-leaf-
clover of its corona, and by the single, prehensile finger
springing from the small of its back, with which it ceaselessly
molded its brown spittle into hard pellets and cemented
them carefully to the rim of its tube.
As usual, the castles chilled Lavon's muscles with doubt
They were perfect, and they had always been one of the
major, stony flowers of summer, long before there had been
any First Awakening, or any men. And there was surely
something wrong with the water in the upper level; it was
warm and sleepy. The heads of the Flosc hummed content-
ediy at the mouths of their tubes; everything was as ft should
be, as it bad always been; the army was a fantasm, the attack
a failure before it had begun
Then they were spied.
The Flosc vanished instantly, contracting violently into
their tubes. The placid humming of their continuous feeding
upon everything that passed was snuffed out; spared motes
drifted about the castle in the light.
Lavon found himself smiling. Not long ago, the Flosc would
only have waited until the humans were close enough, and
then would have sucked them down, without more than a
few struggles here and there, a few pauses in the humming
while the out-size morsels were enfolded and fed into the
grinders. Now, instead, they hid; they were afraid.   
"Go!" he shouted at the top of his voice. "Kill them! Kill
them while they're down!"
The army behind him swept after him with a stunning
composite shout.
Tactics vanished. A petalled corona unfolded in Lavon's
face, and a buzzing whirlpool spun him toward its black
heart. He slashed wildly with his edged wooden splinter.
The sharp edge sliced deeply into the ciliated lobes. The
rotifer screamed like a siren and contracted into her tube,
closing her wounded face. Grimly, Lavon followed.
It was pitch dark inside the castle, and the raging currents
of pain which flowed past him threw him from one pebbly
wall to another. He gritted his teeth and probed with the. It bit into a yielding surface at once, and another
scream made his ears ring, mixed with mangled bits of words
in Lavon's own language, senseless and horrible with agony.
He slashed at them until they stopped, and continued to slash
until he could control his terror.
As soon as he was able, he groped in the torn corpse for
the eggs. The point found their life and pricked it. Trembling, .
he pulled himself back to the mouth of the tube, and without
stopping to think pushed himself off at the first Eater to
pass it.
The thing was a Dicran; she doubled viciously upon him
at once. Even the Eaters had learned something about co-
operation. And the Dicrans fought well in open water. They
were the best possible reinforcements the Flosc could have
called.
The Dicran's armor turned the point of Lavon's splinter
easily. He jabbed frantically, hoping to hit a joint, but the
agile creature gave him no time to aim. She charged him
irresistibly,  and her humming corona folded down  around
his head, pinned his forearms to his sides
The Eater heaved convulsively and went limp. Lavon half
slashed, half tore his way free. A Didin was drawing back,out its seizing-organ. The body floated downward.
"Thanks," Lavon gasped. The Proto darted off without re-
plying; it lacked sufficient cilia to imitate human speech.it lacked the desire as well; the Didins were not
sociable.
A tearing whirlpool sprang into being again around him,
and he flexed his sword-arm. In the next five dreamlike
minutes he developed a technique for dealing with the sessile,
sucking Flosc. Instead of fighting the current and swinging
the splinter back and forth against it, he gave in to the
vortex, rode with it, and braced the splinter between his feet,
point down. The results were even better than he had hoped.
The point, driven by the full force of the Flosc's own .trap,the soft, wormlike body half through while it gaped
for the human quarry. After each encounter, Lavon doggedly
went through the messy ritual of destroying the eggs.
At last he emerged from a tube to find that the battle had
drifted away from him. He paused on the edge to get hisback, clinging to the rounded, translucent bricks and
watching the fighting. It was difficult to make any military
sense out of the melee, but as far as he could tell the rotifers
were getting the worst of it. They did not know 'how to meet
so carefully organized an attack, and they were not in any
real sense intelligent.
The Didin were ranging from one side of the fray to the
other, in two tight, vicious efficient groups, englobing and de-
stroying free-swimming rotifers in whole flocks at a time.
Lavon saw no fewer than half a dozen Eaters trapped by
teams of Paras, each pair dragging a struggling victim in a
trichocyst net remorselessly toward the Bottom, where she
would inevitably suffocate. He was astonished to see yone of
the few Noes that had accompanied his army scouring a
cringing Rotar with its virtually harmless tentacle; the Eater
seemed too astonished to fight back, and Lavon for once knew
just how she felt.
A figure swam slowly and tiredly up to him from below. It
was old Shar, puffing hard. Lavon reached a hand down to
him and hauled him onto the lip of the tube. The man's face
wore a frightening expression, half shock, half'pure grief.
"Gone, Lavon," he said. "Gone. Lost."
"What? What's gone? What's the matter?"
"The plate. You were right. I should have known." He
sobbed convulsively.
"What plate? Calm down. What happened? Did you lose
one of the history platesor both of them?"
Slowly his tutor seemed to be recovering control of his
breathing. "One of them," he said wretchedly. "I dropped it
in the fight. I hid the other one in an empty Flosc tube. But I
dropped the first onethe one I'd just begun to decipher. It
went all the way down to the Bottom, and I couldn't get free
to go after itall I could do was watch it go, spinning down
into the darkness. We could sift the mud forever and never
find it."
He dropped his face into his hands. Perched on the edge of
the brown tube in the green glow of the waters, he looked bothand absurd. Lavon did not know what to say; even
he realized that the loss was major and perhaps final, that the
awesome blank in their memories prior to the First Awakening
might now never be filled. How Shar felt about it he could
comprehend only dimly.
Another human figure darted and twisted toward him.
"Lavon!" Phil's voice cried. "It's working, it's working! The
swimmers are running away, what's left of them. There are
still some Flosc in the castles, hiding in the darkness. If we
could only lure them out in the open"
Jarred back to the present, Lavon's mind raced over the pos-
sibilities.  The whole attack could still fail if the Flosc en-
trenched themselves successfully. After all, a big kill had notthe only object; they had started out to capture the
castles.
.  "Shardo these tubes connect with each other?"
"Yes," the old man said without interest. "It's a continuous
system."
Lavon sprang out upon the open water. "Come on, Phil.
We'll attack them from the rear." Turning, he plunged into the
mouth of the tube, Phil on his heels.
It was very dark, and the water was fetid with the odor of
the tube's late owner, but after a moment's groping Lavon
found the opening which lead into the next tube. It was easy
to tell which way was out because of the pitch of the walls;
everything the Flosc built had a conical bore, differing from
the next tube only in size. Determinedly Lavon worked his
way toward the main stem, going always down and in.
Once they passed beneath an opening beyond which the
water was in furious motion, and out of which poured
muffled sounds of shouting and a defiant buzz. Lavon stopped
to probe through the hole with his sword. The rotifer gave a
shrill, startled shriek  and jerked her wounded tail upward,
involuntarily releasing her toe-hold upon the walls of th?
tube. Lavon moved on, grinning. The men above would do the
rest.
Reaching the central stem at last, Lavon and Phil went
methodically from one branch to another, spearing thp sur-
prised Eaters from behind or cutting them loose so that the
men outside could get at them as they drifted upward, pro-
pelled by the drag of their own coronas. The trumpet shape
of the tube* prevented the Eaters from turning to fight, and
from following them through the castle to surprise them from
behind; each Plosc had only the one room, which she never.
The gutting of the castles took hardly fifteen minutes. The
day was just beginning to end when Lavon emerged with Phil
at the mouth of a turret to look down upon the first. City of
Man.
He lay in darkness, his forehead pressed against his
knees, as motionless as a dead man. The water was stuffy,
cold, the blackness complete. Around him were the walls of a
tube of Flosc's castle; above him a Para laid another sand
grain upon a new domed roof. The rest of the army rested in
other tubes, covered with other new stony caps, but there was
no sound of movement or of voices. It was as quiet as a ne-
cropolis.
Lavon's thoughts were slow and bitter as drugged syrup. He
had been right about the passage of the seasons. He had had
barely enough time to bring all his people from the hall to the
castles before the annual debacle of the fall overturn. Thenwaters of the universe had revolved once, bringing the
skies to the Bottom, and the Bottom to the skies, and then
mixing both. The thermocline was destroyed until next year's
spring overturn would reform it.
And inevitably, the abrupt change in temperature and
oxygen concentration had started the spore-building glands
again. The spherical amber shell was going up around Lavon
now, and there was nothing he could do about it. It was an in-
voluntary process, as dissociated from his control as the beat-
ing of his heart. Soon the light-generatin)? oil which filled the
spore would come pouring out, expelling and replacing the
cold, foul water, and then sleep would come ...
And all this had happened just as they had made a real
gain, had established themselves in enemy country, had come
within reach of the chance to destroy the Eaters wholesale and
forever. Now the eggs of the Eaters had been laid, and next
year it would have to be done all over again. And there was
the loss of the plate; he had hardly begun to reflect upon what
that would mean for the future.
There was a soft chunk as the last sand grain fell into place
on the roof. The sound did not quite bring the final wave of
despair against which he had been fighting in advance. In-
stead, it seemed to carry with it a wave of obscure content-
ment, with which his consciousness began to sink more and
more rapidly toward sleep. They were safe, after all. They
could not be ousted from the castle. And there would be fewer
Eaters next year, because of all the eggs that had been de-, and the layers of those eggs . . . There was one plate
still left...
Quiet and cold; darkness and silence.
In a forgotten corner of the galaxy, the watery world of
Hydrot hurtles endlessly around the red star, Tau Ceti. For
many months life has swarmed in its lakes and pools, but now
the sun retreats from the zenith, and the snow falls, and the
ice advances from the eternal ocean. Life sinks once more
toward slumber, simulating death, and the battles and lusts
and ambitions and defeats of a thousand million microscopic
creatures retreat in to the limbo where such things matter not
at all.
No, such things matter not at all when winter reigns on
Hydrot; but winter is an inconstant king.

Cycle Two
Shar set down the thick, ragged-edged metal plate at last,
and gazed instead out the window of the castle, apparentlyhis eyes on the glowing green-gold obscurity of the
summer waters. In the soft fluorescence which played down
upon him, from the Noc dozing impassively in the groined
vault of the chamber, Lavon could see that he was in fact a
young man. His face was so delicately formed as to suggest
that it had not been many seasons since he had first emerged
from his spore.
But of course there had been no real reason to have ex-
pected an old man. All the Shars had" been referred to tradi-
tionally as "old" Shar. The reason, like the reasons for every-
thing else, had been forgotten, but the custom had persisted.
The adjective at least gave weight and dignity to the office
that of the center of wisdom of all the people, as each Lavon
had been the center of authority.
The present Shar belonged to the generation XVI, and
hence would have to be at least two seasons younger than
Lavon himself. If he was old, it was only in knowledge.
"Lavon, I'm going to have to be honest with you," Shar said
at last, still looking out of the tall, irregular window. "You've
come to me at your maturity for the secrets on the metal plate,
just as your predecessors did to mine. I can give some of
them to youbut for the most part, I don't know what they
mean."
"After so many generations?" Lavon asked, surprised.
"Wasn't it Shar III who made the first complete translation?
That was a long time ago."
The young man turned and looked at Lavon with eyes made
dark and wide by the depths into which they had been staring.
"I can read what's on the plate, but most of it seems to make
no sense. Worst of all, the record's incomplete. You didn't
know that? It is. One of the plates was lost in a battle during
the first war with the Eaters, while these castles were still in
their hands."
"What am I here for, then?" Lavon said. "Isn't there any-
thing of value on the remaining plate? Did they really contain
'the wisdom of the Creators,' or is that another myth?"
"No. No, it's true," Shar said slowly, "as far as it goes."
He paused, and both men turned and gazed at the ghostly
creature which had appeared suddenly outside the window.
Then Shar said gravely, "Come in, Para."
The slipper-shaped organism, nearly transparent except for
the thousands of black-and-silver granules and frothy bubbles
which packed its interior, glided into the chamber and hov-
vered, with a muted whirring of cilia. For a moment it re-
mained silent, speaking telepathically to the Noc floating in
the vault, after the ceremonious fashion of all the Protos. No
human had ever intercepted one of these colloquies, but
there was no doubt about their reality; humans had used them
for long-range communication for generations.
Then the Para's cilia vibrated once more. "We are arrived,
Shar and Lavon, according to the custom."
"And welcome," said Shar. "Lavon, let's leave this matter
of the plates for a while, until you hear what Para has to
say; that's a part of the knowledge Lavons must have as they
come into their office, and it comes before the plates. I can
give you some hints of what we are. First Para has to tell you
something about what we aren't."
Lavon nodded, willingly enough, and watched the Proto as
it settled gently to the surface of the hewn table at which Shar
had been sitting. There was in the entity such a perfection and
economy of organization, such a grace and surety of move-
ment, that he could hardly believe m his own new-won ma-. Para, like all the Protos, made him feel, not perhaps
poorly thought-out, but at least unfinished.
"We know that in this universe there is logically no place
for man," the gleaming, now immobile cylinder upon the
table droned abruptly. "Our memory is the common property
of all our races. It reaches back to a time when there were no
such creatures as man here, nor any even remotely like men.remembers also that once upon a day there were men here,
suddenly, and in some numbers. Their spores littered the Bot-
tom; we found the spores only a short time after our season's
Awakening, and inside them we saw the forms of men, slum-
bering.
"Then men shattered their spores and emerged. At first they
seemed helpless, and the Eaters devoured them by scores, as in
those days they devoured everything that moved. But that soon
ended. Men were intelligent, active. And they were gifted
with a trait, a character, possessed by no other creature in
this world. Not even the savage Eaters had it. Men organized
us to exterminate the Eaters, and therein lay the difference.
Men had initiative. We have the word now, which you gave
us, and we apply it, but we still do not know what the thing is
that it labels."
"You fought beside us," Lavon said.
"Gladly. We would never have thought of that war by our-
selves, but it was good and brought good. Yet we wondered.
We saw that men were poor swimmers, poor walkers, poor
crawlers, poor climbers. We saw that men were formed to
make and use tools, a concept we still do not understand, for
so wonderful a gift is largely wasted in this universe, and there
is no other. What good are tool-useful members such as the
hands of men? We do not know. It seems plain that so radical
a thing should lead to a much. greater rulership over the world
than has, in fact, proven to be possible for men."
Lavon's head was spinning. "Para, I had no notion that you
people were philosophers."
"The Protos are old," Shar said. He had again turned to
look out the window, his hands locked behind his back. "They
aren't philosphers, Lavon, but they are remorseless logicians.to Para."
"To this reasoning there could be but one outcome," the
Para said. "Our strange ally, Man, was like nothing else in this
universe. He was and is unfitted for it. He does not belong
here; he has beenadapted. This drives us to think that there
are other universes besides this one, but where these universes
might lie, and what their properties might be, it is impossible
to imagine. We have no imagination, as men know."
Was the creature being ironic? Lavon could not tell. He
said slowly. "Other universes? How could that be true?"
"We do not know," the Para's uninfleoted voice hummed.
Lavon waited, but obviously the Proto had nothing more to
say.
Shar had resumed sitting on the window sill, clasping his
knees, watching the come and go of dim shapes in the lighted. "It is quite true," he said. "What is written on the plate
makes it plain. Let me tell you now what it says.
"We were made, Lavon. We were made by men who were
not as we are, but men who were our ancestors all the same.
They were caught in some disaster, and 'they made us, and
put us here in our universeso that, even though they had
to die, the race of men would live."
Lavon surged up from the woven spirogyra mat upon
which he had been sitting. "You must think I'm a fool," he
said sharply.
"No. You're our Lavon; you have a right to know the facts.
Make what you like of them." Shar swung his webbed toes
back into the chamber. "What I've told you may be hard to
believe, but it seems to be so; what Para says backs it up. Our
unfitness to live here is self-evident. I'll give you some ex-
amples:
'The past four Shars discovered that we won't get any far-
ther in our studies until we learn how to control heat. We've
produced enough heat chemically to show 'that even the water
around us changes when the temperature gets high enough
or low enough, that we knew from the beginning. But there
we're stopped."
"Why?"
"Because heat produced in open water is carried off as rap-
idly as it's produced. Once we tried to enclose that heat, and
we blew up a whole tube of the castle and killed everything
in range; the shock was terrible. We measured the pressures
that were involved in that explosion, and we discovered that
no substance we know could have resisted them. Theory sug-
gests some stronger substancesbut we need heat to form
them!
"Take our chemistry. We live in water. Everything seems
to dissolve in water, to some extent. How do we confine a
chemical test to the crucible we put it in? How do we main-
tain a solution at one dilution? I don't know. Every avenue
leads me to the same stone door. We're thinking creatures,
Lavon, but there's something drastically wrong in the way
we think about this universe we live in. It just doesn't seem
to lead to results."
Lavon pushed back his floating hair futilely. "Maybe
you're thinking about the wrong results. We've had no trou-
ble with warfare, or crops, or practical things like that. If
we can't create much heat, well, most of us won't miss it; we
don't need more than we "have. What's the other universe
supposed to be like, the one our ancestors lived in? Is it any
better than this one?"
"I don't know," Shar admitted. "It was so different that it's
hard to compare the two. The metal plate tells a story about
men who were travelling from one place to another in a
container that moved by itself. The only analogue I can think
of is 'the shallops of diatom shells that our youngsters used
to sled along the thennocline; but evidently what's meant is
something much bigger.
"I picture a huge shallop, closed on all sides, big enough
to hold many peoplemaybe twenty or thirty. It had to
- travel for generations through some kind of medium where
there wasn't any water to breathe, so the people had to carry
their own water and renew it constantly. There were no
seasons; no ice formed on the sky, because there couldn't be 
any sky in a closed shallop; and so there was no spore
formation.
"Then the shallop was wrecked somehow. The people in it
knew they were going to die. They made us, and put us here,
as if we were their children. Because they had to die, they
wrote their story on the plates, to tell us what had happened.
I suppose we'd Understand it better if we had the plate Shar I
lost during the warbut we don't."
"The whole thing sounds like a parable," Lavon said, shrug-
ging. "Or a song. I can see why you don't understand it.
What I can't see is why you bother to try."
"Because of the plate," Shar said. "You've handled it your-
self now, so you know that we've nothing like it. We have
crude, impure metals we've hammered out, metals that last
for a while and then decay. But the plate shines on, genera-
tion after generation. It doesn't change; our hammers and
our graving tools break against it; the little heat we can gen-
erate leaves it unharmed. That plate wasn't formed in our
universeand that one fact makes every word on it impor-
tant to me. Someone went to a great deal of trouble to make
those plates indestructible, and to give them to us. Someone
to whom the word 'stars' was important enough to be worthrepetitions, despite the fact that the word doesn't
seem to mean anything. I'm ready to think that if our makers
repeated a word even twice on a record that seems likely to
last  forever,  then  it's  important  for us  to know what it
means."
Layon stood up once more.
"All these extra universes and huge shallops and meaning-
less words1 can't say that they don't exist, but I don't seedifference it makes," he said. "The Shars of a few
generation's ago spent their whole lives breeding better algae
crops for us, and showing us how to cultivate them, instead
of living haphazardly on bacteria. Farther back, the Shars
devised war engines, and war plans. All that was work worth
doing. The Lavons of those days evidently got along without
the metal plate and its puzzles, and saw to it that the Shars
did, too. Well, as far as I'm concerned, you're welcome to the
plate, if you like it better than crop improvementbut I
think it ought to be thrown away."
"All right," Shar said, shrugging. "If you don't want it, that
ends the traditional interview. We'll go our"
There was a rising drone from the table-top. The Para was
lifting itself, waves of motion passing over its cilia, like the
waves which went silently across the fruiting stalks of the
fields of delicate fungi with which the Bottom was planted.
It had been so silent that Lavon had forgotten it; he could tell
from Shar's startlement that Shar had, too.
"This is a great decision," the waves of sound washing
from the creature throbbed. "Every Proto has heard it, and
agrees with it. We have been afraid of this metal plate for a
long time, afraid that men would learn to understand it and
follow what it says to some secret place, leaving the Protos
behind. Now we are not afraid."
"There wasn't anything to be afraid of," Lavon said indul-
gently.
"No Lavon before you, Lavon, had ever said so," the Para
said. "We are glad. We will throw the plate away, as Lavon
orders."
With that, the shining creature swooped toward the em-
brasure. With it, it bore away the remaining plate, which hadresting under it on the tabletop, suspended delicately incurved tips of its supple ventral cilia. Inside its pellucid
body, vacuoles swelled to increase its buoyancy and enable
it to carry the heavy weight.
With a cry, Shar plunged through the water toward the
window.
"Stop, Para!"                                  i
But Para was already gone, so swiftly that it had pot even
beard the call. Shar twisted his body and brought up one
shoulder against the tower wall. He said nothing. His face
was enough. Lavon could not look into it for more than an
instant.
The shadows of the two men began to move slowly along
the uneven cobbled floor. The Noc descended toward them
from the vault, its tentacle stirring the water, its internal light
flaring and fading irregularly. It, too, drifted through the
window after its cousin, and sank: slowly away toward the
Bottom. Gently its living glow dimmed, flickered in the depths,winked out.

For many days, Lavon was able to avoid thinking much about
the loss. There was always a great deal of work to be done.
Maintenance of the castles was a never-ending task. The
thousand dichotomously-branching wings tended to crumble
with time, especially at their bases where they sprouted from
one another, and no Shar had yet come forward with a
mortar as good as the rotifer-spittle which had once held
them together. In addition, the breaking through of windows
and the construction of chambers in the early days had been
haphazard and often unsound. The instinctive architecture of
the Eaters, after all, had not been meant to meet the needs
of human occupants.
And then there were the crops. Men no longer fed precar-
iously upon passing bacteria snatched to the mouth; nowwere the drifting mats of specific water-fungi and algae,
and the mycelia on the Bottom, rich and nourishing, which
had been bred by five generations of Shars. These had to be
tended constantly to keep the strains pure, and to keep the
older and less intelligent species of the Protos from grazing
on them. In this latter task, to be sure, the 'more intricate and
far-seeing Proto types cooperated, but men were needed to
supervise.
There had been a time, after the war with the Eaters, when
it  had  been  customary  to  prey  upon  the  slow-moving  and
stupid diatoms, whose exquisite and fragile glass shells were
so easily burst, and who were unable to learn that a friendly
voice did not necessarily mean a friend. There were still
people who would crack open a diatom when no one else was
looking, but they were regarded as barbarians, to the puzzle-
ment of the Protos. The blurred and simple-minded speech
of the gorgeously engraved plants had brought them into the
category of community petsa concept which the Protos
were utterly unable to grasp, especially since men admitted
that diatoms on the half-frustrule were delicious.
Lavon had had to agree, very early, that the distinction was
tiny. After all, humans did eat the desmids, which differed
from the diatoms only in three particulars: Their shells were
flexible, they could not move (and for that matter neither
could all but a few groups of diatoms), and they did not
speak. Yet to Lavon, as to most men, there did seem to be
some kind of distinction, whether the Protos could see it
or not, and that was that. Under the circumstances he felt
that it was a part of his duty, as the hereditary leader of
men, to protect the diatoms from the occasional poachers who
browsed upon them, in defiance of custom, in the high levels
of the sunlit sky.
Yet Lavon found it impossible to keep himself busy enough
to forget that moment when the last clues to Man's origin and
destination had been seized, on authority of his own care-
less exaggeration, and borne away into-dim space.
It  might  be  possible  to  ask  Para  for the return of the
plate, explain that a mistake had been made. The Protos
were creatures of implacable logic, but they respected men,
were used to illogic in men, and might reverse their deci-
sion if pressed
We are sorry. The plate was carried over the bar and re-
leased in the gulf. We will have the Bottom there searched,
but...
With a sick feeling he could not repress, Lavon knew that
that would be the answer, or something very like it. When
the Protos decided something was worthless, they did not
hide it in some chamber like old women. They threw it away
efficiently.
Yet despite the tormenting of his consicence, Lavon was
nearly convinced that the plate was well lost. What had it
ever done for Man, except to provide Shais with useless
things to think about in the late seasons of their lives? What
the Shars themselves had done to benefit Man, here, in the
water, in the world, in the universe, had been done by direct
experimentation. No bit of useful knowledge had ever come
from the plates. There had never been anything in the sec-
ond plate, at least, but things best left unthought. The Protos
were right.
Lavon shifted his position on the plant frond, where he had
been sitting in order to overlook the harvesting of an experi-
mental crop of blue-green, oil-rich algae drifting in a clotted
mass close to the top Of the sky, and scratched his back gently
against the coarse bole. The Protos were seldom wrong, after
all. Their lack of creativity, their inability to think an orig-
inal thought, was a gift as well as a limitation. It allowedto see and feel things at all times as they werenot as
they hoped they might be, for they had no ability to hope,
either.
"La-voni Laa-vah-on!"
The long halloo came floating up from the sleepy depths.
Propping one hand against the top of the frond, Lavon bent
and looked down. One of the harvesters was looking up at
him, holding loosely the adze with which he had been split-
ting free from the raft the glutinous tetrads of the algae.
"I'm up here. What's the matter?"
"We have the ripened quadrant cut free. Shall we tow it
away?"
'Tow it away," Lavon said, with a lazy gesture. He leaned
back again. At the same instant, a brilliant reddish glory
burst into being above him, and cast itself down toward the
depths like mesh after mesh of the finest-drawn gold. The
great light which lived above the sky during the day, bright-
ening or dimming according to some pattern no Shar ever
had fathomed, was blooming again.
Few men, caught in the warm glow of that light, could re-
sist looking up at itespecially when the top of the sky itself
wrinkled and smiled just a moment's climb or swim away.
Yet, as always, .Lavon's bemused upward look gave him back
nothing but his own distorted, hobbling reflection, and a re-
flection of the plant on which he rested.
Here was the upper limit, the third of the three surfaces
of the universe. The first surface was the Bottom, where the
water ended.
The second surface was the thermocline, definite enough
in summer to provide good sledding, but easily penetrable
if you knew how.
The third surface was the sky. One could no more pass
through that surface than one could penetrate the Bottom,
nor was there any better reason to try. There the universe
ended. The light which played over it daily, waxing and wan-
ing as it chose, seemed to be one of its properties.
Toward the end of the season, the water gradually became
colder and more difficult to breathe, while at the same time
the light grew duller and stayed for shorter periods between. Slow currents started to move. The high waters
turned chill and started to fall. The Bottom mud stirred and
smoked away, carrying with it the spores of the fields of fungi.
The thermocline tossed, became choppy, and melted away.
The sky began to fog with particles of soft silt carried up
from the Bottom, the walls, the corners of the universe.
Before very long, the whole world was cold, inhospitable,
flocculent with yellowing, dying creatures. The world died
until the first tentative current of warm water broke the win-
ter silence.
That was how it was when the second surface vanished. If
the sky were to melt away . . .
"Lavoni"
Just after the long call, a shining bubble rose past Lavon.
He reached out and poked it, but it bounded away from his
sharp thumb. The gas bubbles which rose from the Bottomlate summer were almost invulnerableand when some
especially hard blow or edge did penetrate them, they broke
into smaller bubbles which nothing could touch, leaving be-
hind a remarkably bad smell.
Gas. There was no water inside a bubble. A man who got
inside a bubble would have nothing to breathe.
But, of course, it was impossible to enter a bubble. The
surface tension was too strong. As strong as Shar's metal
plate. As strong as the top of the sky.
As strong as the top of the sky. And above thatonce the
bubble was brokena world of gas instead of water? Were
all worlds bubbles of water drifting in gas?
If it were so, travel between them would be out of the
question, since it would be impossible to pierce the sky to
begin with. Nor did the infant cosmography include any pro-
visions for Bottoms for the worlds.
And yet some of the local creatures did burrow into the
Bottom, quite deeply, seeking something in those depths
which was beyond the reach of Man. Even the surface of the
ooze, in high summer, crawled with tiny creatures for which
mud was a natural medium. And though many of the en-
tities with which man lived could not pass freely between the
two countries of water which were divided by the thermo-
cline, men could and did.
And if the new universe of which Shar had spoken existed
at all, it had to exist beyond the sky, where the light was.
Why could not the sky be passed, after all? The fact that
bubbles could sometimes be broken showed that the surface
skin had formed between water and gas wasn't completely in-
vulnerable. Had it ever been tried?
Lavon did not suppose that one man could butt his way
through the top of the sky, any more than he could burrow
into the Bottom, but there might be ways around <he diffi-
culty. Here at his back, for instance, was a plant which gave
every appearance of continuing beyond the sky; its upper
fronds broke off and were bent back only by a trick of re-
flection.
It had always been assumed that the plants died where they
touched the sky. For the most part, they did, for frequently
the dead extension could be seen, leached and yellow, the
boxes of its component cells empty, floating unbedded in the
perfect mirror. But some were simply chopped off, like the
one which sheltered him now. Perhaps that was only an il-
lusion,  and instead it soared indefinitely into some other
placesome place where men might once have been born,
and might still live ...
Both plates were gone. "There was only one other way to
find out.
Determinedly, Lavon began to climb toward the wavering
mirror of the sky. His thorn-thumbed feet trampled oblivi-upon the clustered sheaths of fragile stippled diatoms.
The tulip-heads of Vortae, placid and murmurous cousins of
Para, retracted startledly out of his way upon coiling stalks,
to make silly gossip behind him.
Lavon did not hear them. He continued to climb doggedly
toward the light, his fingers and toes gripping the plant-bole.
"Lavon! Where are you going? Lavoni"
He leaned out and looked down. The man with the adze, a
doll-like figure, was beckoning to him from a patch of blue-
green retreating over a violet abyss. Dizzily he looked away,
clinging to the bole; he had never been so high before. He
had, of course, nothing to fear from falling, but the fear was
in his heritage. Then he began to climb again.
After a while, he touched the sky with one hand. He
stopped to breathe. Curious bacteria gathered about the base
of his thumb where blood from a small cut was fogging
away, scattered at his gesture, and wriggled mindlessly back
toward the dull red lure.
He waited until he no longer felt winded, and resumed
climbing. The sky pressed down against the top of his head,
against the back of his neck, against his shoulders. It seemed
to give slightly, with a tough, frictionless elasticity. The
water here was intensely bright, and quite colorless. He
climbed another step, driving his shoulders against that enor-
mous weight.
It was fruitless. He might as well have tried to penetrate a
cliff.
Again he had to rest. While he panted, be made a curious. All around the bole of the water plant, the steel
surface of the sky curved upward, making a kind of sheath.
He found that he could insert his hand into itthere was al-
most enough space to admit his head as well. Clinging closely
to the bole, he looked up into the inside of the sheath, probing
it with his injured hand. The glare was blinding.
There was a tind of soundless explosion. His whole wrist
was suddenly encircled in an intense, impersonal grip, as if
it were being cut in two.  In blind astonishment, he lunged
upward.
The ring of pain travelled smoothly down his upflung arm
as he rose, was suddenly around his shoulders and chest.
Another lunge and his knees were being squeezed in the cir-
cular vise. Another
Something was horribly wrong. He clung to the bole and
tried to gasp, but there wasnothing to breathe.
The water came streaming out of his body, from his mouth,
his nostrils, the spiracles in his sides, spurting in tangible jets.
An intense and fiery itching crawled over the surface of his
body. At each spasm, long knives ran into him, and from a
great distance he heard more water being expelled from his
book-lungs in an obscene, frothy sputtering. Inside his head,
a patch of fire began to eat away at the floor of his nasal
cavity.
Lavon was drowning:
With a final convulsion, he kicked himself away from the
splintery bole, and fell. A hard impact shook him; and then
the water, who had clung to him so tightly when he had first
attempted to leave her, took him back with cold violence.
Sprawling and tumbling grotesquely, he drifted, down and
down and down, toward the Bottom.
many days, Lavon lay curled insensibly in his spore, as if
in the winter sleep. The shock of cold which he had felt on
re-entering his native universe had been taken by his body as
a sign of coming winter, as it had taken the ozygen-starvation
of his brief sojourn above the sky. The spore-forming glands
had at once begun to function.
Had it not been for this, Lavon would surely have died.
The danger of drowning disappeared even as he fell, as the
air bubbled out of his lungs and readmitted the life-giving
water. But for acute desiccation and third degree sunburn,
the sunken universe knew no remedy. The healing amniomc
fluid generated by the spore-forming glands, after the trans-
parent amber sphere had enclosed him, offered Lavon his
only chance.
The brown sphere, quiescent in the eternal winter of the
Bottom, was spotted after some days by a prowling ameba.
Down there the temperature was always an even 4, no
matter what the season, but it was unheard of that a spore
should be found there while the high epilimnion was still
warm and rich in oxygen.
Within an hour, the spore was surrounded by scores of
astonished protos, jostling each other to bump their blunt
eyeless prows against the shell. Another hour later, a squad
of worried men came plunging from the castles far above to
press their own noses against the transparent wall. Then swift
orders were given.
Pour Para grouped themselves about the amber sphere, and
there was a subdued explosion as their trichocysts burst. The
four Paras thrummed and lifted, tugging.
Lavon's spore swayed gently in the mud and then rose
slowly, entangled in the fine web. Nearby, a Noc cast a cold
pulsating glow over the operation, for the benefit of the baf-
fled knot of men. The sleeping figure of Lavon, head bowed,
knees drawn up into its chest, revolved with an absurd so-
lemnity inside the shell as it was moved.
"Take him to Shar, Para."
The young Shar justified, by minding his own business, the
traditional wisdom with which his hereditary office had in-
vested him. He observed at once that there was nothing he
could do for the encysted Lavon which would not be classi-
fiable as simple meddling.
He had the sphere deposited in a high tower room of his
castle, where there was plenty of light and the water was
warm, which should suggest to the estivating form that spring
was again on the way. Beyond that, he simply sat and
watched, and kept his speculations to himself.
Inside the spore, Lavon's body seemed to be rapidly shed-
ding its skin, in long strips and patches. Gradually, his curi-
ous shrunkenness disappeared. His withered arms and legs
and sunken abdomen filled out again.
The days went by while Shar watched. Finally he could
discern no more changes, and, on a hunch, had the spore
taken up to the topmost battlements of the tower, into the di-
rect daylight.
An hour later, Lavon moved in his amber prison.
He uncurled and stretched, turned blank eyes up toward
the light. His expression was that of a man who had not yet
awakened from a ferocious nightmare. His whole body shone
with a strange pink newness.
Shar knocked gently on the walls of the spore. Lavon
turned his blind face toward the sound, life coming into his
eyes. He smiled tentatively and braced his hands and feet
against the inner wall of the shell.
The whole sphere fell abruptly to pieces with a sharp crack-
ling. The amnionic fluid dissipated around him  and Shar,
carrying away with it the suggestive odor of a bitter struggle
against death.
Lavon stood among the shards and looked at Shar silently.
At last he said:
"SharI've been above the sky."
"I know," Shar said gently.
Again Lavon was silent. Shar said, "Don't be humble,
Lavon. You've done an epoch-making thing. It nearly cost
you your life. You must tell me the restall of it."
"The rest?"
"You taught me a lot while you slept. Or are you still op-
posed to 'useless' knowledge?"
Lavon could say nothing. He no longer could tell what he
knew from what he wanted to know. He had only one ques-left, but he could not utter it. He could only look dumb-
ly into Shar's delicate face.
"You have answered me," Shar said, even more gently than
before. "Come, my friend; join me at my table. We will plan
our journey to the stars."
There were five of them around Shar's big table: Shar him-
self, Lavon, and the three assistants assigned by custom to
the Shars from the families Than, Tanol and Stravol. The
duties of these three menor, sometimes, womenunder
many previous Shars had been simple and onerous: to put
into effect in the field the genetic changes in the food crops
which the Shar himself had worked out in little, in laboratory
tanks and flats. Under other Shars more interested in metal-
working or in chemistry, they had been-smudged mendig-
gers, rock-splitters, fashioners and cleaners of apparatus.
Under Shar XVI, however, the three assistants had been
more envied than usual among the rest of Lavon's people, for
they seemed to do very little work of any kind. They spent
long hours of every day talking with Shar in his chambers,
poring over records, making miniscule scratch-marks on slate,
or just looking intently at simple things about which thereno obvious mystery. Sometimes they actually worked with
Shar in his laboratory, but mostly they just sat.
Shar XVI had, as a matter of fact, discovered certain rudi-
mentary rules of inquiry which, as he explained it to Lavon,
he had recognized as tools of enormous power. He had become
more interested in passing these on to future workers than in
the seductions of any specific experiment, the journey to the
stars perhaps excepted. The Than, Tanol and Stravol of his
generation were having scientific method pounded into their
heads, a procedure they maintained was sometimes more
painful than heaving a thousand rocks.
That they were the first of Lavon's people to be taxed with
the problem of constructing a spaceship was, therefore, in-
evitable. The results lay on the table: three models, made of
diatom-glass, strands of algae, flexible bits of cellulose, flakes
of stonewort, slivers of wood, and organic glues collected
from the secretions of a score of different plants and animals.
Lavon picked up the nearest one, a fragile spherical con-
struction inside which little beads of dark-brown lavaac-
tually bricks of rotifer-spittle painfully chipped free from theof an unused castlemoved freely back and forth in a
kind of ball-bearing race. "Now whose is this one?" he said,
turning the sphere curiously to and fro.
"That's mine," Tanol said. "Frankly, I don't think it comes
anywhere near meeting all the requirements. It's just the only
design I could arrive at that I think we could build with the
materials and knowledge we have to hand now."
"But how does it work?"
"Hand it here a moment, Lavon. This bladder you see in-
side at the center, with the hollow spirogyra straws leading
out from it to the skin of the ship, is a buoyancy tank. The
idea is that we trap ourselves a big gas-bubble as it rises from
the Bottom and install it in the tank. Probably we'll have to
do that piecemeal. Then the ship rises to the sky on the buoy-
ancy of the bubble. The little paddles, here along these two
bands on the outside, rotate when the crewtfiat's these
bricks you hear shaking around insidewalks a treadmill that
runs around the inside of the hull; they paddle us over to the
edge of the sky. I stole that trick from the way Didin gets
about. Then we pull the paddles inthey fold over into slots,
like thisand, still by weight-transfer from the inside, we roll
ourselves up the slope until we're out in space. When we hit
another world and enter the water again, we let the gas out of
the tank gradually through the exhaust tubes represented by
these straws, and sink down to a landing at a controlled rate."
"Very ingenious," Shar said thoughtfully. "But I can fore-
see some difficulties. For one thing, the design lacks stability."
"Yes, it does," Tanol agreed. "And keeping it in motion is
going to require a lot of footwork. But if we were to sling a
freely-moving weight from the center of gravity of the ma-, we could stabilize it at least partly. And the biggest ex-
penditure of energy involved in the whole trip is going to be
getting the machine up to the sky in the first place, and with
this design that's taken care ofas a matter of fact, once the
bubble's installed, we'll have to keep the ship tied down until
we're ready to take off."
"How about letting the gas out?" Lavon said. "Will it go out
through those little tubes when we want it to? Won't it just
cling to the walls of the tubes instead? The skin between
water and gas is pretty difficult to deformto that I can tes-
tify."
Tanol frowned. "That I don't know. Don't forget that the
tubes will be large in the real ship, not just straws as they are
in the model."
"Bigger than a man's body?" Than said.
"No, hardly. Maybe as big through as a man's head, at the
most."
"Won't work," Than said tersely. "I tried it. You can't lead
a bubble through a pipe that small. As Lavon says, it clings
to the inside of the tube and won't be budged unless you put
pressure behind itlots of pressure. If we build this ship,
we'll just have to abandon it once we hit our new world;
we won't be able to set it down anywhere."
"That's out of the question," Lavon said at once. "Putting
aside for the moment the waste involved, we may have to use
the ship again in a hurry. Who knows what the new world willlike? We're going to have to be able to leave it again if it
turns out to be impossible to live in."
"Which is your model, Than?" Shar said.
"This one. With this design, we do the trip the hard way
crawl along the Bottom until it meets the sky, crawl until
we hit the next world, and crawl wherever we're going when
we get there. No aquabatics. She's treadmill-powered, like
Tanol's, but not necessarily man-powered; I've been thinking
a bit about using motile diatoms. She steers by varying the
power on one side or the other. For fine steering we can also
hitch a pair of thongs to opposite ends of the rear axle and
swivel her that way."
Shar looked closely at the tube-shaped model and pushed
it experimentally along the table a little way. "I like that," he
said presently. "It sits still when you want it to. With Than's
spherical ship, we'd be at the mercy of any stray current at
home or in the new worldand for all I know there may be
currents of some sort in space, too, ga& currents perhaps.
Lavori, what do you think?"
"How would we build it?" Lavon said. "It's round in cross-
section. That's all very well for a model, but how do you make
a really big tube of that shape that won't fall in on itself?"
"Look inside, through the front window," Than said.
"You'll see beams that cross at the center, at right angles to
the long axis. They hold the walls braced."
"That 'consumes a lot of space," Stravol objected. By far
the quietest and most introspective of the three assistants, he
had not spoken until now since the beginning of the confer-
ence. "You've got to have free passage back and forth inside
the ship. How are we going to keep everything operating if
we have to be crawling around beams all the time?"
"All right, come up with something better," Than said,
shrugging.
"That's easy. We bend hoops."
"Hoops!" Tanol said. "On that scale? You'd have to soak
your wood in mud for a year before it would be flexible
enough, and then it wouldn't have the strength you'd need."
"No, you wouldn't," Stravol said. "I didn't build a ship
model, I just made drawings, and my ship isn't as good as
Than's by a long distance. But my design for the ship is also, so I did build a model of a hoop-bending machine
that's it on the table. You lock one end of your beam down in
a heavy vise, like so, leaving the butt striking out on the other
side. Then you tie up the other end with a heavy line, around
this notch. Then you run your line around a windlass, and
five or six men wind up the windlass, like so. That pulls the
free end of the beam down until the notch engages with thisslot, which you've pro-cut at the other end. Then you un-
lock the vise, and there's your hoop; for safety you might
drive a peg through the joint to keep the thing from spring-
ing open unexpectedly."
"Wouldn't the beam you were using break after it had bent
a certain distance?" Lavon asked.
"Stock timber certainly would," Stravol said. "But for this
trick you use green wood, not seasoned. Otherwise you'd have
to soften your beam to uselessness, as Tanol says. But live
wood will flex enough to make a good, strong, single-unit
hoopor if it doesn't, Shar, the little rituals with numbers
that you've been teaching us don't mean anything after alll"
Shar smiled. "You can easily make a mistake in using num-
bers," he said.
"I checked everything."
"I'm sure of it. And I think it's well worth a trial. Anything
else to offer?"
"Well," Stravol said, "I've got a kind of live ventilating sys-
tem I think should be useful. Otherwise, as I said, Than's
ship strikes me as the type we should build; my own's hope"
lessly cumbersome."
"I have to agree," Tanol said regretfully. "But I'd like to
try  putting  together  a  lighter-than-water  ship  sometime,
maybe just for local travel. If the new world is bigger than
ours, it might not be possible to swim everywhere you might
want to go."
"That never occurred to me," Lavon exclaimed. "Suppose
the new world is twice, three times, eight times as big as ours?
Shar, is there any reason why that couldn't be?"
"None that I know of. The history plate certainly seems to
take all kinds of enormous distances practically for granted.
All right, let's make up a composite design from what we
have here. Tanol, you're the best draftsman among us, sup-
pose you draw it up. Lavon, what about labor?"
"I've a plan ready," Lavon said. "As I see it, the people who
work on the ship are going to have to be on the job full time.
Building the vessel isn't going to be an overnight task, or even
one that we can finish in a single season, so we can't count
on using a rotating force. Besides, this is technical work; once
a man learns how to do a particular task, it would be wasteful
to send him back to tending fungi just because somebody else
has some time on his hands.
"So I've set up a basic force involving the two or three most
intelligent hand-workers from each  of the various trades.
Those people I can withdraw from their regular work withoutthe way we run our usual concerns, or noticeably in-the burden on the others in a given trade. They will
do the skilled labor, and stick with the ship until it's done.
Some of them will make up the crew, too. For heavy, un-
skilled jobs, we can call on the various seasonal pools of un-
skilled people without disrupting our ordinary life."
"Good," Shar said. He leaned forward and rested linked
hands on the edge of the tablealthough, because of the web-
bing between his fingers, he could link no more than the fin-
gertips. "We've really made remarkable progress. I didn't ex-
pect that we'd have matters advanced a tenth as far as this
by the end of this meeting. But maybe I've overlooked some-
thing important. Has anybody any more suggestions, or any
questions?"
"I've got a question," Stravol said quietly.
"All right, let's hear it."
'Where are we going?"                    ' 
There was quite a long silence. Finally Shar said: "Stravol,
I can't answer that yet. I could say that we're going to the
stars, but since we still have no idea what a star is, that an-
swer wouldn't do you much good. We're going to make this
trip because we've found that some of the fantastic things
that the history plate says are really so. We know now that
the sky can be passed, and that beyond the sky there's a re-
gion where there's no water to breathe,, the region our an-
cients called 'space.' Both of these ideas always seemed to be
against common sense, but nevertheless we've found that
they're true.
"The history plate also says that there are other worlds
than ours, and actually that's an easier idea to accept, once
you've fofind out that the other two are so. As for the stars
well, we just don't know yet, we haven't any information at
all that would allow us to read the history plate on that sub-
ject with new eyes, and there's no point in mating wild
guesses unless we can test the guesses. The stars are in space,
and presumably, once we're out in space, we'll see them and
the meaning of the word will become clear. At least we can
confidently expect to see some clueslook at all the informa-
tion we got from Lavon's trip of a few seconds above the skyl
"But in the meantime, there's no point in our speculating in
a bubble. We think there are other worlds somewhere, and
we're devising means to make the trip. The other questions,
the pendant ones, just have to be put aside for now. We'll an-
swer them eventuallythere's no doubt in my mind about
that. But it may take a long time."
Stravol grinned ruefully. "I expected no more. In a way, I
think the whole project in crazy. But I'm in it right out to
the end, all the same."
Shar and Lavon grinned back. All of them had the fever,
and Lavon suspected that their whole enclosed universe wouldit with them before long. He said:
"Then let's not waste a minute. There's still a huge mass of
detail to be worked out, and after that, all the hard work will
just have begun. Let's get moving!"
The five men arose and looked at each other. Their expres-
sions varied, but in all their eyes there was in addition the
same mixture of awe and ambition: the composite face of the
shipwright and of the astronaut.
Then they went out, severally, to begin their voyages.
It was two winter sleeps after Lavon's disastrous climb be-
yond the sky that all work on the spaceship stopped. By then,
Lavon knew that he had hardened and weathered into that
temporarily ageless. state a man enters after he has just
reached his prime; and he knew also that there were wrinkles
engraved on his brow, to Stay and to deepen.
"Old" Shar, too, had changed, his features losing some of
their delicacy as 'he came into his maturity. Though the wedge~
shaped bony structure of his face would give him a withdrawn
and poetic look for as long as he lived, participation in 'the
plan had given his expression a kind of executive overlay,
which at best made it assume a mask-like rigidity, and at
worst coarsened it somehow.
Yet despite the bleeding away of the years, the spaceship
was still only a hulk. It lay upon a platform built above the
tumbled boulders of the sandbar which stretched out from
one wall of the world. It was an immense hull of pegged
wood, broken by regularly spaced gaps through which the
raw beams of its skeleton could be seen.
Work upon it had progressed fairly rapidly at first, for it
was not hard to visualize what kind of vehicle would be
needed to crawl through empty space without losing its water;
Than and his colleagues had done that job well. It had been
recognized, too, that the sheer size of the machine would en-
force a long period of construction, perhaps as long as two
full seasons; but neither Shar and his assistants nor Lavon
had anticipated any serious snag.
For that matter, part of the vehicle's apparent incomplete-
ness was an illusion. About a third of its fittings were to con-
sist of living creatures, which could not be expected to install
themselves in the vessel much before the actual takeoff.
Yet time and time again, work on the ship had to be halted
for long periods. Several times whole sections needed to be
ripped out, as it became more and more evident that hardly
a single normal, understandable concept could be applied to
the problem of space travel.
The lack of the history plate, which the Para steadfastly
refused to deliver up, was a double handicap. Immediately
upon its loss, Shar had set himself to reproduce it from mem-
ory; but unlike the more religious of his ancestors, he had
never regarded it as holy writ, and hence had never set him-
self to memorizing it word by word. Even before the theft, he
had accumulated a set of variant translations of passages pre-
senting specific experimental problems, which were stored in
his library, carved in wood. Most of these translations, how-
ever, tended to contradict each other, and none of them re-
lated to spaceship construction, upon which the original had
been vague in any case.
No duplicates of the cryptic characters of the original had
ever been made, for the simple reason that there was nothing
in the sunken universe capable of destroying the originals,
nor of duplicatihg their apparently changeless permanence.
Shar remarked too late that through simple caution they
should have made a number of verbatim temporary records
but after generations of green-gold peace, simple caution
no longer covers preparation against catastrophe. (Nor, for
that matter, does a culture which has to dig each letter of its
simple alphabet into pulpy water-logged wood with a flake of
stonewort encourage the keeping of records in triplicate.)
As a result, Shar's imperfect memory of the contents of the
history plate, plus the constant and miUenial doubt as to the
accuracy of the various translations, proved finally to be the
worst obstacle to progress on the spaceship itself.
"Men must paddle before they can swim," Lavon observed
belatedly, and Shar was forced to agree with him.
Obviously, whatever the ancients had known about space-
ship construction, very little of that knowledge was usable to
a people still l trying to build its first spaceship from scratch. In
retrospect, it was not surprising that the great hulk rested in-upon its platform above the sand boulders, exuding
a musty odor of wood steadily losing its strength, two genera-
tions after its flat bottom had been laid down.
The fat-faced young man who headed the strike delega-
tion to Shar's chambers was Phil XX, a man two generations
younger than Shar, four younger than Lavon. There were
crow's-feet at the comers of his eyes, which made him look
both like a querulous old man and like an infant spoiled in
the spore.                                    '
"We're calling a halt to this crazy project," he said bluntly.
"We've slaved away our youth on it, but now that we're our
own masters, it's over, that's all. It's over."
"Nobody's compelled you," Lavon said angrily.
"Society does-, our parents do," a gaunt member of the del-
egation said. "But now we're going to start living in the real
world. Everybody these days knows that there's no other
world but this one. You oldsters can hang on to your super-
stitions if you like. We don't intend to."
Baffled, Lavon looked over at Shar. The scientist smiled
and said, "Let them go, Lavon. We have no use for the faint-
hearted."
The fat-faced young man flushed. "You can't insult us into
going back to work. We're through. Build your own ship to no!"
"All' right," Lavon said evenly. "Go on, beat it. Don't stand
around here orating about it. You've made your decisions
and we're not interested in your self-justifications. Goodbye."
The fat-faced young man evidently still had quite a bit of
heroism to dramatize which Lavon's dismissal had short-cir-
cuited.  An  examination  of  Lavon's  stony  face,  however,
seemed to convince him that he had to take his victory as he
found it. He and the delegation trailed ingloriously out the
archway.
"Now what?" Lavon asked when they had gone. "I must
admit, Shar, that I would have tried to persuade them. We do
need the workers, after all."
"Not as much as they need us," Shar said tranquilly. "I
know all those young men. I think they'll be astonished at
the runty crops their fields will produce next season, after
they have to breed them without my advice. Now, how many
volunteers have you got for the crew of the ship?"
"Hundreds. Every youngster of the generation after Phil's
wants to go along. Phil's wrong about the segment of the pop-
ulace, at least. The project catches the imagination of the
very young."
"Did you give them any encouragement?"
"Sure," Lavon said. "I told them we'd call on them if they
were chosen. But you can't take that seriously! We'd do badly
to displace our picked group of specialists with youths who
have enthusiasm and nothing else."
"That's not what I had in mind, Lavon. Didn't I see a Noc
in these chambers somewhere? Oh, there he is, asleep in the
dome. Noc!"
The creature stirred its tentacle lazily.
"Noc, I've a message," Shar called. "The Protos are to tell
all men that those who wish to go to the next world with the
spaceship must come to the staging area right away. Say that
we can't promise to take everyone, but that only those who
help us to build the ship will be considered at all."
The Noc curled its tentacle again, and appeared to go back
to sleep.
turned from the arrangement of speaking-tube mega-
phones which was his control board and looked at Para.
"One last try," he said. "Will you give us back the history
plate?"
"No, Lavon. We have never denied you anything before.
But this we must."
"You're going with us, though, Para. Unless you give. us
back the knowledge we need, you'll lose your life if we lose
ours."                                                     '
"What is one Para?" the creature said. "We are all alike.
This cell will die; but the Protos need to know how you fare
on this journey. We believe you should make it without the
plate, for in no other way can we assess the real importance
of the plate."
"Then you admit you still have it. What if you can't com-
municate with your fellows once we're out in space? How do
you know that water isn't essential to your telepathy?"
The Proto was silent. Lavon stared at it a moment, then
turned deliberately back to the speaking tubes. "Everyone
hang on," he said. He felt shaky. "We're about to start. Stra-
vol, is the ship sealed?"
"As far as I can tell, Lavon."
Lavon shifted to another megaphone. He took a deep
breath. Already the water seemed stifling, although the ship
hadn't moved.
"Ready with one-quarter power. . . . One, two, three, go."
The whole ship jerked and settled back into place again.
The raphe diatoms along the under hull settled into their
niches, their jelly treads turning against broad endless belts
of crude caddis-worm leather. Wooden gears creaked, step-
ping up the slow power of the creatures, transmitting it to the
sixteen axles of the ship's wheels.
The ship rocked and began to roll slowly along the sand
bar. Lavon looked tensely through the mica port. The world
flowed painfully past him. The ship canted and began to climb
the slope. Behind him, he could feel the electric silence of
Shar, Para, and the two alternate pilots. Than and Stravol, as
if their gaze were stabbing directly through his body and on
out the port. The world looked different, now that he was
leaving it. How had he missed all this beauty before?
The slapping of the endless belts and the squeaking and
groaning of the gears and axles grew louder as the slope steep-
ened. The ship continued to climb, lurching. Around it, squad-
rons of men and Protos dipped and wheeled, escorting it to-
ward the sky.
Gradually the sky lowered and pressed down toward the
top of the ship.
"A little more work from your diatoms, Tanol," Lavon
said. "Boulder ahead." The ship swung ponderously. "All
right, slow them up again. Give us a shove from your side,
Tolno, that's too muchthere, that's it. Back to normal;
you're still turning us I Tanol, give us one burst to line us up
again. Good. All right, steady drive on all sides. It shouldn't
be long now."
"How can you think in webs like that?" the Para won-
dered behind him.
"I just do, that's all. It's the way men think. Overseers, a
little more thrust now; the grade's getting steeper."
The gears groaned. The ship nosed up. The sky brightened
in Lavon's face. Despite himself, he began to be frightened.
His lungs seemed to burn, and in his mind he felt his long
fall through nothingness toward the chill slap of the water as
if he were experiencing it for the first time. His skin itched
and burned. Ctould he go up there again? Up there into the
burning void, the great gasping agony where no life should
go?
The sand bar began to level out and the going became a
little easier. Up here, the sky was so close that the lumbering
motion of the huge ship disturbed it. Shadows of wavelets
ran across the sand. Silently, the thick-barreled bands of
blue-green algae drank in the light and converted it to oxy-
gen, writhing in their slow mindless dance just under the
long mica skylight which ran along the spine of the ship. In
the hold, beneath the latticed corridor and cabin floors,
whirring Vortae kept the ship's water in motion, fueling them-upon drifting organic particles.
One by one, the figures wheeling outside about the ship
waved arms or cilia and fell back, coasting down the slope
of th? sand bar toward the familiar world, dwindling and
disappearing. There was at last only one single Euglena, half-
plant cousin of the Protos, forging along beside the space-
ship into the marshes of the shallows. It loved the light, but
finally it, too, was driven away into deeper, cooler waters, its
single whiplike tentacle undulating placidly as it went. It was
not very bright, but Lavon felt deserted when it left.
Where they were going, though, none could follow.
Now the sky was nothing but a thin, resistant skin of water
coating the top of the ship. The vessel slowed, and when
Lavon called for more power, it began to dig itself in among
the sandgrains and boulders.
"That's not going to work," Shar said tensely. "I think we'd
better step down the gear-ratio, Lavon, so you can apply stress
more slowly."
"All right," Lavon agreed. "Full stop, everybody. Shar, will
you supervise gear-changing, please?"
Insane brilliance of empty space looked Lavon full in the
face just beyond his big mica bull'seye. It was maddening to
be forced to stop here upon the threshold of infinity; and it
was dangerous, too. Lavon could feel building in him the old
fear of the outside. A few moments more of inaction, he knew
with a gathering coldness in his belly, and he would 'be un-
able to go through with it.
Surely, he thought, there must be a better way to change
gear-ratios than the traditional one, which involved disman-
tling almost the entire gear-box. Why couldn't a number of
gears of different sizes be carried on the same shaft, not nec-
essarily all in action at once, but awaiting use simply by shov-
ing the axle back and forth longitudinally in its sockets? It
would still be clumsy, but it could be worked on orders from
the bridge and would not involve shutting down the entire
machineand throwing the new pilot into a blue-green funk.
Shar came lunging up through the trap and swam himself
to a stop.
"All set," he said. "The big reduction gears aren't taking
the strain too well, though."
"Splintering?"
"Yes. I'd go it slow at first."
Lavon nodded mutely. Without allowing himself to stop,
even for a moment, to consider the consequences of his
words, he called: "Half power." ,
The ship hunched itself down again and began to move,
very slowly indeed, but more smoothly than before. Over-
head, the sky thinned to complete transparency. The great
light came blasting in. Behind Lavon there was an uneasy stir.
The whiteness grew at the front ports.
Again the ship slowed, straining against the blinding bar-
rier. Lavon swallowed and called for more power. The ship
groaned like something about to die. It was now almost at
a standstill.
"More power," Lavon ground out.
Once more, with infinite slowness, the ship began to move.
Gently, it tilted upward.
Then it lunged forward and every board and beam in it
began to squall.
"Lavoni Lavon!"
Lavon started sharply at the shout. The voice was coming
at him from one of the megaphones, the one marked for the
port at the rear of the ship.
"Lavoni"
"What is it? Stop your damn yelling."
"I can see the top of the skyl From the other side, from the
top side! It's like a big flat sheet of metal. We're going away
from. it. We're above the sky, Lavon, we're above the sky!"violent start swung Lavon around toward the for-
ward port. On the outside of the mica, the water was evap-
orating with shocking swiftness, taking with it strange distor-
tions and patterns made of rainbows.
Lavon saw space.
It was at first like a deserted and cruelly dry version of the
Bottom. There were enormous boulders, great cliffs, tumbled,
split, riven, jagged rocks going up and away in all directions,
as if scattered at random by some giant.
But it had a sky of its owna deep blue dome so far away
that he could not believe in, let alone estimate, what its dis-
 tance might be. And in this dome was a ball of reddish-white
fire that seared his eyeballs.
The wilderness of rock was still a long way away from the
ship, which now seemed to be resting upon a level, glistening. Beneath the surface-shine, the plain seemed to be made
of sand, nothing but familiar sand, the same substance which
had heaped up to form a bar in Lavon's universe, the bar
along which the ship had climbed. But the glassy, colorful
skin over it
Suddenly Lavon became conscious of another shout from
the megaphone banks. He shook his head savagely and said,
"What is it now?"
"Lavon, this is Tol. What have you gotten us into? The
belts are locked. The diatoms can't move them. They aren't
faking, either; we've rapped them hard enough to make them
think we were trying to break their shells, but they still can't
give us more power."
"Leave them alone," Lavon snapped. "They can't fake; they
haven't enough intelligence. If they say they can't give you
more power, they can't."
"Well, then, you get us out of it."
Shar came forward to Lavon's elbow. "We're on a spac&-
water interface, where the surface tension is very high," he
said softly. "If you order the wheels pulled up now, I think
we'll make better progress for a while on the belly tread."
"Good enough," Lavon said with relief. "Hello below
haul up the wheels."
"For a long while," Shar said, "I couldn't understand the
reference of thi history plate to 'retractable landing gear,' but
it finally occurred to me that the tension along a space-mud
interface would hold any large object pretty tightly. That'sI insisted on our building the ship so that we could lift
the wheels."
"Evidently the ancients knew their business after all, Shar."
Quite a few minutes laterfor shifting power to the belly
treads involved another setting of the gear boxthe ship
was crawling along the shore toward the tumbled roc5. Anx-
iously,  Lavon  scanned the jagged,  threatening wall for a
break. There was a sort of rivulet off toward the teft which
might offer a route, though a dubious one, to the next world.
After some thought, Lavon ordered his ship turned toward it.
"Do you suppose that thing in the sky is a 'star'?" he asked.
"But there were supposed to be lots of them. Only one is up
.thereand one's plenty for my taste."
"I don't know," Shar admitted. "But I'm beginning to get
a picture of the way the universe is made, I think. Evidefttly
our world is a sort of cup in the Bottom of this huge one.
This one has a sky of its own; perhaps it, too, is only a cup
in the Bottom of a still huger world, and so on and on with-
out end. It's a hard concept to grasp, I'll admit. Maybe it
would be more sensible to assume that all the worlds are cups
in this one common surface, and that the great light shines
on them all impartially."
"Then what makes it go out every night, and dim even in
the day during winter?" Lavon demanded.
"Perhaps it travels in circles, over first one world, then an-
  other. How could I know yet?"
"Well, if you're right, it means that all we have to do is
crawl along here for a while, until we hit the top of the sky' of
another world," Lavon said. "Then we dive in. Somehow it
seems too simple, after all our preparations."
Shar chuckled, but the sound did not suggest that he had
discovered anything funny. "Simple? Have you noticed the
temperature yet?"
Lavon had noticed it, just beneath the surface of aware-
ness, but at Shar's remark he realized that he was gradually
being stifled. The oxygen content of the water, luckily, had
not dropped, but the temperature suggested the shallows in
the last and worst part of autumn. It was like trying to
breathe soup.
"Than, give us more action from the Vortae," Lavon said.
"This is going to be unbearable unless we get more circula-
tion."
There was a reply from Than, but it came to Lavon's ears
only as a mumble. It was all he could do now to keep his at-
tention on the business of steering the ship.
The cut or defile in the scattered razor-edged rocks was a
little closer, but there still seemed to be many miles of rough
desert to cross. After a while, the ship settled into a steady,
painfully slow crawling, with less pitching and jerking than
before, but also with less progress. Under it, there was now a
sliding, grinding sound, rasping against the hull of the ship
itself, as if it were treadmilling over some coarse lubricant the
particles of which were each as big as a man's head.
Finally Shar said, "Lavon, we'll have to stop again. The
sand this far up is dry, and we're .wasting energy using the
tread."
"Are you sure we can take it?" Lavon asked, gasping for
breath. "At least we are moving. If we stop to lower the wheels
and change gears again, we'll boil."
"We'll boil if we don't," Shar said calmly. "Some of our
algae are dead already and the rest are withering. That's a
pretty good sign that we can't take much more. I don't think
we'll make it into the shadows, unless we do change over and
put on some speed."
There was a gulping sound from one of the mechanics. "We
ought to turn back," he said raggedly. "We were never meant
to be outhere in the first place. We were made for the water,
not for this hell."
"We'll stop," Lavon said, "but we're not turning back. That's
final."      -
The words made a brave sound, but the man had upset
Lavon more than he dared to admit, even to himself. "Shar,"
he said, "make it fast, will you?"
The scientist nodded and dived below.
The minutes stretched out. The great red-gold globe in the
sky blazed and blazed. It had moved down the sky, far down,
so that the light was pouring into the ship directly in Lavon's
face, illuminating every floating particle, its rays like long
milky streamers. The currents of water passing Lavon's cheek
were almost hot.
How could they dare go directly forward into that inferno?
The land directly under the "star" must be even hotter than it
was here.
"Lavon! Look at Paral"
Lavon forced himself to turn and look at his Proto ally.
The great slipper had settled to the deck, where it was lying
with only a feeble pulsation of its cilia. Inside, its vacuoles
were beginning to swell, to become bloated, pear-shaped
bubbles, crowding the granulated cytoplasm, pressing upon
the dark nuclei.
"Is . . . is he dying?"
"This cell is dying," Para said, as coldly as always. "But
go ongo on. There is much to learn, and you may live, even
though we do not. Go on."
"You'refor us now?" Lavon whispered.
"We have alway been for you. Push your folly to the utter-
most. We will benefit in the end, and so will Man."
The whisper died away. Lavon called the creature again,
but it did not respond.
There was a wooden clashing from below, and then Shar's
voice came tinnily from one of the megaphones. "Lavon, go
aheadi The diatoms are dying, too, and then we'll be without
power. Make it as quickly and directly as you can."
Grimly, Lavon leaned forward. "The 'star' is directly over
the land we're approaching."
"It is? It may go lower still and the shadows will get longer.
That may be our only hope."
Lavon had not thought of that. He rasped into the banked
megaphones. Once more, the ship began to move, a littlenow, but seemingly still at a crawl. The thirty-two
wheels rumbled.
It got hotter.
Steadily, with a perceptible motion, the "star" sank in
Lavon's face. -Suddenly a new terror struck him. Suppose it
should continue to go down until it Was gone entirely? Blast-
ing though it was now, it was the only source of heat. Would
not space become bitter cold on the instantand the ship
an expanding, bursting block of ice?
The shadows lengthened menacingly, stretching across the
desert toward the forward-rolling vessel. There was no talking
in the cabin, just the sound of ragged breathing and the
creaking of the machinery.
Then the jagged horizon seemed to rush upon them. Stony
teeth cut into the lower rim of the ball of fire, devoured it
swiftly. It was gone.
They were in the lee of the cliffs. Lavon ordered the ship
turned to parallel the rock-line; it responded heavily, slug-
gishly. Far above, the sky deepened steadily, from blue to
indigo.
Shar came silently up through the trap and stood beside
Lavon, studying that deepening color and the lengthening of
the shadows down the beach toward their own world. He said
nothing, but Lavon was sure that the same chilling thought
was in his mind.
"Lavon."
Lavon jumped. Shar's voice had iron in it. "Yes?"
"We'll have to keep moving. We must make the next world,
wherever it is, very shortly."
"How can we dare move when we can't see where we're
going? Why not sleep it overif the cold will let us?"
"It will let us," Shar said. "It can't get dangerously cold up
here. If it did, the skyor what we used to think of as the
skywould have frozen over every night, even in summer.
But what I'm thinking about is the water. The plants will gosleep now. In our world that wouldn't matter; the supply of
oxygen there is enough to last through the night. But in this
confined space, with so many creatures in it and no supply of
fresh water, we will probably smother."
Shar seemed hardly to be involved at all, but spoke rather
with the voice of implacable physical laws.
"Furthermore," he said, staring unseeingly out at the raw
landscape, "the diatoms are plants, too. In other words, we
must stay on the move for as long as we have oxygen and
powerand pray that we make it." .
"Shar, we had quite a few Protos on board this ship once.
And Para there isn't quite dead yet. If he were, the cabin
would be intolerable. "The ship is nearly sterile of bacteria,
because all the protos have been eating them as a matter of
course and there's no outside supply of them, either. But still
and all there would have been some decay."
Shar bent and tested the pellicle of the motionless Para
with a probing finger. "You're right, he's still alive. What
does that prove?"
"The Vortae are also alive; I can feel the water circulating.
Which proves that it wasn't the heat that hurt Para. it was
the light. Remember how badly my skin was affected after I
climbed beyond the sky? Undiluted starlight is deadly. We
should add that to the information from the plate."
"I still don't get the point."
"It's this: We've got three or four Noc down below. They
were shielded from the light, and so must be still alive. If we
concentrate them in the diatom galleys, the dumb diatoms will
think it's still daylight and will go on working. Or we can con-
centrate them up along the spine-of the ship, and keep the
algae putting out oxygen. So the question is: Which do we
need more, oxygen or power? Or can we split the difference?"
Shar actually grinned. "A brilliant piece of thinking. We
may make a Shar out of you some day, Lavon. No, I'd say
that we can't split the difference. Noc's light isn't intense
enough to keep the plants making oxygen; I tried it once, and
the oxygen production was too tiny to matter. Evidently the
plants use the light for energy. So we'll have to settle for the
diatoms for motive power."
"All right. Set it up that way, Shar."
Lavon brought the vessel away from the rocky lee of the
cliff, out onto the smoother sand. All trace of direct light was
now gone, although there was still a soft, general glow on the
sky.                                                       ,
"Now then," Shar said thoughtfully, "I would guess that
there's water over there in the canyon, if we can reach it. I'll
go below again and arrange"
Lavon gasped.
"What's the matter?"
Silently, Lavon pointed, his heart pounding.
The entire dome of indigo above them was spangled with
' tiny, incredibly brilliant lights. There were hundreds of them,
and more and more were becoming visible as the darkness
deepened. And far away, over the ultimate edge of the rocks,
was a dim red globe, crescented wigh ghostly silver. Near the
zenith was another such body, much smaller, and silvered all
over...
Under the two moons of Hydrot, and under the eternal
stars,  the  two-inch  wooden  spaceship  and  its  microscopic
cargo toiled down the slope toward the drying little rivulet.

The ship rested on the Bottom of the canyon for the rest of
the night. The great square doors were unsealed and thrown
open to admit the raw, irradiated, life-giving water from out-
sideand the wriggling bacteria which were fresh food.
No other creatures approached them, either out of curi-
osity or for hunting, while they slept, although Lavon had
posted guards at the doors just in case. Evidently, even up
here on the very floor of space, highly organized creatures
were quiescent at night.
But when the first flush of light filtered through the water,
trouble threatened.
First of all, there was the bug-eyed monster. The thing was
green and had two snapping claws, either one of which could
have broken the ship in two like a spirogyra strand. Its eyes
were black and globular, on the ends of short columns, and its
long feelers were thicker through than a plant bole. It passed
in a kicking fury of motion, however, never noticing the ship
at all.
"Is thata sample of the kind of life they have here?" La-
von whispered. "Does it all run as big as that?" Nobody an-
swered, for the very good reason that nobody knew.
After a while, Lavon risked moving the ship forward against
the current, which was slow but heavy. Enormous writhing
worms whipped past them. One struck the hull a heavy blow,
then thrashed on obliviously.
"They don't notice us," Shar said. "We're too small. Lavon,
the ancients warned us of the immensity of space, but even
when you see it, it's impossible to grasp. And all those stars
can they mean what I think they mean? It's beyond thought,
beyond belief!"
"The Bottom's sloping," Lavon said, looking ahead intently.
"The walls of the canyon are retreating, and the water's be-
coming rather silty. Let the stars wait, Shar; we're coming
toward the entrance of our new world."
Shar subsided moodily. His vision of space apparently had
disturbed him, perhaps seriously. He took little notice of the
great thing that was happening, but instead huddled worriedly
over his own expanding speculations. Lavon felt the old gap
between their minds widening once more.
Now the Bottom was tilting upward again. Lavon had no
experience with delta-formation, for no rivulets left his own
world, and the phenomenon worried him. But his worries were
swept away in wonder as the ship topped the rise and nosed
over.
Ahead, the Bottom sloped away again, indefinitely, into
glimmering depths. A proper sky was over them once more,
and Lavon could see small rafts of plankton floating placidly
beneath it. Almost at once, too, he saw several of the smaller
kinds of Protos, a few of which were already approaching the
ship
Then the girl came darting out of the depths, her features
blurred and distorted with distance and terror. At first she
did not seem to see the ship at all. She came twisting and
turning lithely through the water, obviously hoping only to
throw herself over the mound of the delta and into the sav-
age streamlet beyond.
Lavon was stunned. Not that there were men herehe had
hoped for that, had even known somehow that men were
everywhere in the universebut at the girl's single-minded
flight toward suicide.
"What"
Then a dim buzzing began to grow in his ears, and he un-
derstood.
"Sharl Than! Stravoll" he bawled. "Break out crossbows and
spears! Knock out all the windows!" He lifted a foot and
kicked through the port in front of him. Someone thrust a
crossbow into his hand.
"What?" Shar blurted. "What's the matter? What's happen-
 ing?"
"Eaters!"
The cry went through the ship like .a galvanic shock. The
rotifers back in Lavon's own world were virtually extinct, but
everyone knew 'thoroughly the grim history of the long battle
man and Proto had waged against them.
The girl spotted the ship suddenly and paused, obviously
stricken with despair at the sight of this new monster. She
drifted with her own momentum, her eyes alternately fixed
upon the ship and jerking back over her shoulder, toward
 where the buzzing snarled louder and louder in the dimness.
"Don't stop!" Lavon shouted. "This way, this way! We're
friends! We'll help!"
Three great semi-transparent trumpets of smooth flesh bored
over the rise, the many thick cilia of their coronas whirring
greedily. Dicrans, arrogant in their flexible armor, quarrel-
ing thickly among themselves as they moved, with the few
blurred, pre-symbolic noises which made up their own lan-
guage.                                                 '
Carefully, Lavon wound the crossbow, brought it to his
shoulder, and fired. The bolt sang away through the water. It
lost momentum rapidly, and was caught by a stray current
which brought it closer to the girl than to the Eater at which
Lavon had aimed.
He bit his lip, lowered the weapon, wound it up again. It
did not pay to underestimate the range; he would have to wait.
Another bolt, cutting through the water from a side port,
made him issue orders to cease firing "until," he added,
"you can see their eyespots."
The irruption of the rotifers decided the girl. The motion-
less wooden monster was of course strange to her, but it had
not yet menaced herand she must have known what it
would be like to have three Dicrans over her, each trying to
grab from the others the largest share. She threw herself to-
wards the bull'seye port. The three Eaters screamed with furygreed and bored in after her.
She probably would not have made it, had not the dull vi-
sion of the lead Dicran made out the wooden shape of the
ship at the last instant. The Dicran backed off, buzzing, and
the other two sheered away to avoid colliding with her. After
that they had another argument, though they could hardly
have formulated what it was that they were fighting .about;
they were incapable of exchanging any thought much more
complicated than the equivalent of "Yaah," "Drop dead,"
and "You're another."
While they were still snarling at each other, Lavon pierced
the nearest one aU the way through with an arablast bolt.
The surviving two were at once involved in a lethal battle
over the remains.
"Than, take a party out and spear me those two Eaters
while they're still fighting," Lavon ordered. "Don't forget to
destroy their eggs, too. I can see that this world needs a little
taming."
The girl shot through the port and brought up against the
far wall of the cabin, flailing in terror. Lavon tried to approach
her, but from somewhere she produced a flake of stonewort
chipped to a nasty point. Since she was naked, it was hard to
tell where she had been hiding it, but she obviously knew how
to use it, and meant to. Lavon retreated and sat down on the
stool before his control board, waiting while she took in the
cabin, Lavon, Shar, the other pilots, the senescent Para.
At last she said: "Areyouthe godsfrom beyond the
sky?"
"We're from beyond the sky, all right," Lavon said. "But
we're not gods. We're human beings, just like you. Are there
many humans here?"
The girl seemed to assess the situation very rapidly, savage
though she was. Lavon had the odd and impossible impression
that he should recognize her:  a tall,  deceptively relaxed,
tawny woman, not after all quite like this one . . . a woman
from another world, to be sure, but still . . .
She tucked the knife back into her bright, matted hairaha,
Lavon thought confusedly, there's a trick I may need to re-
memberand shook her head.
"We are few. The Eaters are everywhere. Soon they will
have the last of us."
Her fatalism was so complete that she actually did not
seem to care.
"And you've never cooperated against them? Or asked the
Protos to help?"
"The Protos?" She shrugged. "They are as helpless as we
are against the Eaters, most of them. We have no weapons
that kill at a distance, like yours. And it's too late now for
such weapons to do any good. We axe too few, the Eaters too
many."
Labon shook his head emphatically. "You've had one
weapon that counts, all along. Against it, numbers mean noth-
ing. We'll show you how we've used it. You may be able to
use it even better than we did, once you've given it a try."
The girl shrugged again. "We dreamed of such a weapon,
but never found it Are you telling the truth? What is the
weapon?"
"Brains, of course," Lavon said. "Not just one brain, but a
lot of them. Working together. Cooperation."
"Lavon speaks the truth," a weak voice said from the deck.
The Para stirred feebly. The girl watched it with wide eyes.
The sound of the Para using human speech seemed to impressmore than the ship itself, or anything else that it con-
tained.
"The Eaters can be conquered," the thin, burring voice
said. "The Protos will help, as they helped in the world from
which we came. The Protos fought this flight through space,
and deprived Man of his records; but Man made the trip with-
out the records. The Protos will never oppose Man again. We
have already spoken to the Protos of this world, and have told
them that what Man can dream, Man can do. Whether thewill it or not.
"Sharyour metal record is with you. It was hidden in the
ship. My brothers will lead you to it.
"This organism dies now. It dies in confidence of knowl-
edge, as an intelligent creature dies. Man has taught us this.
There is nothing. That knowledge. Cannot do. With it . . .
men . . ."have crossed . . . have crossed space . . ."
The voice whispered away. The shining slipper did not
change, but something about it was gone. Lavon looked at
the girl; their eyes met. He felt an unaccountable Warmth.
"We have crossed space," Lavon repeated softly.
Shar's voice came to him across a great distance. The
young-old man was whispering: "Buthave we?"
Lavon was looking at the girl. He had no answer for Shar's
question. It did not seem to be important.

