 

 

DARWIN’S RADIO

 

*Greg Bear*

 

 

 

 

Ballantine Books * New York

 

 


 

 

 

*FOR MY MOTHER,*

*WILMA MERRIMAN BEAR*

*1915-1997*

 

 

 

 

 


 

*Contents:*

 

          Darwin’s Radio <#_1>

          AFTERWORD <#_AFTERWORD>

          A SHORT BIOLOGICAL PRIMER <#_A_SHORT_BIOLOGICAL>

          SHORT GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS <#_SHORT_GLOSSARY_OF>

          ACKNOWLEDGMENTS <#_ACKNOWLEDGMENTS>

 


 

 

 

*PART ONE***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

 

HEROD’S

WINTER

 

 

 

 

 


 

 


  1

* *

*The Alps, near the Austrian Border with Italy*

*AUGUST*

The flat afternoon sky spread over the black and gray mountains like a
stage backdrop, the color of a dog’s pale crazy eye.

His ankles aching and back burning from a misplaced loop of nylon rope,
Mitch Rafelson followed Tilde’s quick female form along the margin
between the white firn and a dust of new snow on the field. Mingled with
the ice boulders of the fall, crenels and spikes of old ice had been
sculpted by summer heat into milky, flint-edged knives.

To Mitch’s left, the mountains rose over the jumble of black boulders
flanking the broken slope of the ice fall. On the right, in the full
glare of the sun, the ice rose in blinding brilliance to the perfect
catenary of the cirque.

Franco was about twenty yards to the south, hidden by the rim of Mitch’s
goggles. Mitch could hear him but not see him. Some kilometers behind,
also out of sight now, was the brilliant orange, round
fiberglass-and-aluminum bivouac where they had made their last rest
stop. He did not know how many kilometers they were from the last hut,
whose name he had forgotten; but the memory of bright sun and warm tea
in the sitting room, the Gaststube, gave him some strength. When this
ordeal was over, he would get another cup of strong tea and sit in the
Gaststube and thank God he was warm and alive.

They were approaching the wall of rock and a bridge of snow lying over a
chasm dug by meltwater. These now-frozen streams formed during the
spring and summer and eroded the edge of the glacier. Beyond the bridge,
depending from a U-shaped depression in the wall, rose what looked like
a gnome’s upside-down castle, or a pipe organ carved from ice: a frozen
waterfall spread out in many thick columns. Chunks of dislodged ice and
drifts of snow gathered around the dirty white of the base; sun
burnished the cream and white at the top.

Franco came into view as if out of a fog and joined up with Tilde. So
far they had been on relatively level glacier. Now it seemed that Tilde
and Franco were going to scale the pipe organ.

Mitch stopped for a moment and reached behind to pull out his ice ax. He
pushed up his goggles, crouched, then fell back on his butt with a grunt
to check his crampons. Ice balls between the spikes yielded to his knife.

Tilde walked back a few yards to speak to him. He looked up at her, his
thick dark eyebrows forming a bridge over a pushed-up nose, round green
eyes blinking at the cold.

“This saves us an hour,” Tilde said, pointing at the pipe organ. “It’s
late. You’ve slowed us down.” Her English came precise from thin lips,
with a seductive Austrian accent. She had a slight but well-proportioned
figure, white blond hair rucked under a dark blue Polartec cap, an elfin
face with clear gray eyes. Attractive, but not Mitch’s type; still, they
had been lovers of the moment before Franco arrived.

“I told you I haven’t climbed in eight years,” Mitch said. Franco was
showing him up handily. The Italian leaned on his ax near the pipe organ.

Tilde weighed and measured everything, took only the best, discarded the
second best, yet never cut ties in case her past connections should
prove useful. Franco had a square jaw and white teeth and a square head
with thick black hair shaved at the sides, an eagle nose, Mediterranean
olive skin, broad shoulders and arms knotted with muscles, fine hands,
very strong. He was not too smart for Tilde, but no dummy, either. Mitch
could imagine Tilde pulled from her thick Austrian forest by the
prospect of bedding Franco, light against dark, like layers in a torte.
He felt curiously detached from this image. Tilde made love with a
mechanical rigor that had deceived Mitch for a time, until he realized
she was merely going through the moves, one after the other, as a kind
of intellectual exercise. She ate the same way. Nothing moved her
deeply, yet she had real wit at times, and a lovely smile that drew
lines on the corners of those thin, precise lips.

“We must go down before sunset,” Tilde said. “I don’t know what the
weather will do. It’s two hours to the cave. Not very far, but a hard
climb. If we’re lucky, you’ll have an hour to look at what we’ve found.”

“I’ll do my best,” Mitch said. “How far are we from the tourist trails?
I haven’t seen any red paint in hours.”

Tilde pulled away her goggles to wipe them, gave him a flash smile with
no warmth. “No tourists up here. Most good climbers stay away, too. But
I know my way.”

“Snow goddess,” Mitch said.

“What do you expect?” she said, taking it as a compliment. “I’ve climbed
here since I was a girl.”

“You’re still a girl,” Mitch said. “Twenty-five, twenty-six?”

She had never revealed her age to Mitch. Now she appraised him as if he
were a gemstone she might reconsider purchasing. “I am thirty-two.
Franco is forty but he’s faster than you.”

“To hell with Franco,” Mitch said without anger.

Tilde curled her lip in amusement. “We are all weird today,” she said,
turning away. “Even Franco feels it. But another Iceman...what would
that be worth?”

The very thought shortened Mitch’s breath, and he did not need that now.
His excitement curled back on itself, mixing with his exhaustion. “I
don’t know,” he said.

They had opened their mercenary little hearts to him back in Salzburg.
They were ambitious but not stupid; Tilde was absolutely certain that
their find was not just another climber’s body. She should know. At
fourteen, she had helped carry out two bodies spit loose from the
tongues of glaciers. One had been over a hundred years old.

Mitch wondered what would happen if they had found a true Iceman. Tilde,
he was sure, would in the long run not know how to handle fame and
success. Franco was stolid enough to make do, but Tilde was in her own
way fragile. Like a diamond, she could cut steel, but strike her from
the wrong angle and she would come to pieces.

Franco might survive fame, but would he survive Tilde? Mitch, despite
everything, liked Franco.

“It’s another three kilometers,” Tilde told him. “Let’s go.”

Together, she and Franco showed him how to climb the frozen waterfall.
“This flows only during midsummer,” Franco said. “It is ice for a month
now. Understand how it freezes. It is strong down here.” He struck the
pale gray ice of the pipe organ’s massive base with his ax. The ice
linked, spun off a few chips. “But it is verglas, lots of bubbles,
higher up—mushy. Big chunks fall if you hit it wrong. Hurt somebody.
Tilde could cut some steps there, not you. You climb between Tilde and me.”

Tilde would go first, an honest acknowledgment by Franco that she was
the better climber. Franco slung the ropes and Mitch showed them he
remembered the loops and knots from climbing in the Cascades, in
Washington state. Tilde made a face and retied the loop Alpine style
around his waist and shoulders. “You can front most of the way.
Remember, I will chisel steps if you need them,” Tilde said. “I don’t
want you sending ice down on Franco.”

She took the lead.

Halfway up the pillar, digging in with the front points of his crampons,
Mitch passed a threshold and his exhaustion seemed to leak away in
spurts through his feet, leaving him nauseated for a moment. Then his
body felt clean, as if flushed with fresh water, and his breath came
easy. He followed Tilde, chunking his crampons into the ice and leaning
in very close, grabbing at whatever holds were available. He used his ax
sparingly. The air was actually warmer near the ice.

It took them fifteen minutes to climb past the midpoint, onto the
cream-colored ice. The sun came from behind low gray clouds and lit up
the frozen waterfall at a sharp angle, pinning him on a wall of
translucent gold.

He waited for Tilde to tell them she was over the top and secure. Franco
gave his laconic reply. Mitch wedged his way between two columns. The
ice was indeed unpredictable here. He dug in with side points, sending a
cloud of chips down on Franco. Franco cursed, but not once did Mitch
break free and simply hang, and that was a blessing.

He fronted and crawled up the bumpy, rounded lip of the waterfall. His
gloves slipped alarmingly on runnels of ice. He flailed with his boots,
caught a ridge of rock with his right boot, dug in, found purchase on
more rock, waited for a moment to catch his breath, and humped up beside
Tilde like a walrus.

Dusty gray boulders on each side denned the bed of the frozen creek. He
looked up the narrow rocky valley, half in shadow, where a small glacier
had once flowed down from the east, carving its characteristic U-shaped
notch. There had not been much snow for the last few years and the
glacier had flowed on, vanishing from the notch, which now lay several
dozen yards above the main body of the glacier.

Mitch rolled on his stomach and helped Franco over the top. Tilde stood
to one side, perched on the edge as if she knew no fear, perfectly
balanced, slender, gorgeous.

She frowned down on Mitch. “We are getting later,” she said. “What can
you learn in half an hour?”

Mitch shrugged.

“We must start back no later than sunset,” Franco said to Tilde, then
grinned at Mitch. “Not so tough son of a bitch ice, no?”

“Not bad,” Mitch said.

“He learns okay,” Franco said to Tilde, who lifted her eyes. “You climb
ice before?”

 “Not like that,” Mitch said.

They walked over the frozen creek for a few dozen yards. “Two more
climbs,” Tilde said. “Franco, you lead.”

Mitch looked up through crystalline air over the rim of the notch at the
sawtooth horns of higher mountains. He still could not tell where he
was. Franco and Tilde preferred him ignorant. They had come at least
twenty kilometers since their stay in the big stone Gaststube, with the tea.

Turning, he spotted the orange bivouac, about four kilometers away and
hundreds of meters below. It sat just behind a saddle, now in shadow.

The snow seemed very thin. The mountains had just passed through the
warmest summer in modern Alpine history, with increased glacier melt,
short-term floods in the valleys from heavy rain, and only light snow
from past seasons. Global warming was a media cliche now; from where he
sat, to his inexpert eye, it seemed all too real. The Alps might be
naked in a few decades.

The relative heat and dryness had opened up a route to the old cave,
allowing Franco and Tilde to discover a secret tragedy.

 

Franco announced he was secure, and Mitch inched his way up the last
rock face, feeling the gneiss chip and skitter beneath his boots. The
stone here was flaky, powdery soft in places; snow had lain over this
area for a long time, easily thousands of years.

Franco lent him a hand and together they belayed the rope as Tilde
scrambled up behind. She stood on the rim, shielded her eyes against the
direct sun, now barely a handspan above the ragged horizon. “Do you know
where you are?” she asked Mitch.

Mitch shook his head. “I’ve never been this high.”

“A valley boy,” Franco said with a grin.

Mitch squinted.

They stared over a rounded and slick field of ice, the thin finger of a
glacier that had once flowed nearly seven miles in several spectacular
cascades. Now, along this branch, the flow was lagging. Little new snow
fed the glacier’s head, higher up. The sun-blazed rock wall above the
icy rip of the bergschrund rose several thousand feet straight up, the
peak higher than Mitch cared to look.

“There,” Tilde said, and pointed to the opposite rocks below an arete.
With some effort, Mitch made out a tiny red dot against the shadowed
black and gray: a cloth banner Franco had planted on their last trip.
They set off over the ice.

The cave, a natural crevice, had a small opening, three feet in
diameter, artificially concealed by a low wall of head-size boulders.
Tilde took out her digital camera and photographed the opening from
several angles, backing up and walking around while Franco pulled down
the wall and Mitch surveyed the entrance.

“How far back?” Mitch asked when Tilde rejoined them.

“Ten meters,” Franco said. “Very cold back there, better than a freezer.”

“But not for long,” Tilde said. “I think this is the first year this
area has been so open. Next summer, it could get above freezing. A warm
wind could get back in there.” She made a face and pinched her nose.

Mitch unslung his pack and rummaged for the electric torches, the box of
hobby knives, vinyl gloves, all he could find in the stores down in the
town. He dropped these into a small plastic bag, sealed the bag, slipped
it into his coat pocket, and looked between Franco and Tilde.

“Well?” he said.

“Go,” Tilde said, making a pushing motion with her hands. She smiled
generously.

He stooped, got on his hands and knees, and entered the cave first.
Franco came a few seconds later, and Tilde just behind him.

Mitch held the strap of the small torch in his teeth, pushing and
squeezing forward six or eight inches at a time. Ice and fine powdered
snow formed a thin blanket on the floor of the cave. The walls were
smooth and rose to a tight wedge near the ceiling. He would not be able
to even crouch here. Franco called forward, “It will get wider.”

“A cozy little hole,” Tilde said, her voice hollow.

The air smelled neutral, empty. Cold, well below zero. The rock sucked
away his heat even through the insulated jacket and snow pants. He
passed over a vein of ice, milky against the black rock, and scraped it
with his fingers. Solid. The snow and ice must have packed in at least
this far when the cave was covered. Just beyond the ice vein, the cave
began to slant upward, and he felt a faint puff of air from another
wedge in the rock recently cleared of ice.

Mitch felt a little queasy, not at the thought of what he was about to
see, but at the unorthodox and even criminal character of this
investigation. The slightest wrong move, any breath of this getting out,
news of his not going through the proper channels and making sure
everything was legitimate...

Mitch had gotten in trouble with institutions before. He had lost his
job at the Hayer Museum in Seattle less than six months before, but that
had been a political thing, ridiculous and unfair.

Until now, he had never slighted Dame Science herself.

He had argued with Franco and Tilde back in the hotel in Salzburg for
hours, but they had refused to budge. If he had not decided to go with
them, they would have taken somebody else—Tilde had suggested perhaps an
unemployed medical student she had once dated. Tilde had a wide
selection of ex-boyfriends, it seemed, all of them much less qualified
and far less scrupulous than Mitch.

Whatever Tilde’s motives or moral character, Mitch was not the type to
turn her down, then turn them in; everybody has his limits, his boundary
in the social wilderness. Mitch’s boundary began at the prospect of
getting ex-girlfriends in trouble with the Austrian police.

Franco plucked a crampon on the sole of Mitch’s boot. “Problem?” he asked.

“No problem,” Mitch replied, and grunted forward another six inches.

 A sudden oblong of light formed in one eye, like a large out-of-focus
moon. His body seemed to balloon in size. He swallowed hard. “Shit,” he
muttered, hoping that didn’t mean what he thought it meant. The oblong
faded. His body returned to normal.

Here, the cave constricted to a narrow throat, less than a foot high and
twenty-one or twenty-two inches wide. Angling his head sideways, he
grabbed hold of a crack just beyond the throat and shinnied through. His
coat caught and he heard a tearing sound as he strained to unhook and
slip past.

“That’s the bad part,” Franco said. “I can barely make it.”

“Why did you go this far?” Mitch asked, gathering his courage in the
broader but still dark and cramped space beyond.

“Because it was here, no?” Tilde said, voice like the call of a distant
bird. “I dared Franco. He dared me.” She laughed and the tinkling echoed
in the gloom beyond. Mitch’s neck hair rose. The new Iceman was laughing
with them, perhaps at them. He was dead already. He had nothing to worry
about, plenty to be amused about, that so many people would make
themselves miserable to see his mortal remains.

“How long since you last came here?” Mitch asked. He wondered why he
hadn’t asked before. Perhaps until now he hadn’t really believed. They
had come this far, no sign of pulling a joke on him, something he
doubted Tilde was constitutionally capable of anyway.

“A week, eight days,” Franco said. The passage was wide enough that
Franco could push himself up beside Mitch’s legs, and Mitch could shine
the torch back into his face. Franco gave him a toothy Mediterranean smile.

Mitch looked forward. He could see something ahead, dark, like a small
pile of ashes.

“We are close?” Tilde asked. “Mitch, first it is just a foot.”

Mitch tried to parse this sentence. Tilde spoke pure metric. A “foot,”
he realized, was not distance, it was an appendage. “I don’t see it yet.”

“There are ashes first,” Franco said. “That may be it.” He pointed to
the small black pile. Mitch could feel the air falling slowly just in
front of him, flowing along his sides, leaving the rear of the cave
undisturbed.

He moved forward with reverent slowness, inspecting everything. Any
slightest bit of evidence that might have survived an earlier
entry—chips of stone, pieces of twig or wood, markings on the walls.. .

Nothing. He got on his hands and knees with a great sense of relief and
crawled forward. Franco became impatient.

“It is right ahead,” Franco said, tapping his crampon again.

“Damn it, I’m taking this real slow, not to miss anything, you know?”
Mitch said. He restrained an urge to kick out like a mule.

“All right,” Franco said amiably.

Mitch could see around the curve. The floor flattened slightly. He
smelled something grassy, salty, like fresh fish. His neck hair rose
again, and a mist formed over his eyes. Ancient sympathies.

“I see it,” he said. A foot pushed out beyond a ledge, curled up on
itself—small, really, like a child’s, very wrinkled and dark brown,
almost black. The cave opened up at that point and there were scraps of
dried and blackened fiber spread on the floor—grass, perhaps. Reeds.
Otzi, the original Iceman, had worn a reed cape over his head.

“My God,” Mitch said. Another -white oblong in his eye, slowly fading,
and a whisper of pain in his temple.

“It’s bigger up there,” Tilde called. “We can all fit and not disturb them.”

“Them?” Mitch asked, shining his light back between his legs.

Franco smiled, framed by Mitch’s knees. “The real surprise,” Franco
said. “There are two.”


 

 

*2*

 

*Republic of Georgia*

Kaye curled up in the passenger seat of the whining little Fiat as Lado
guided it along the alarming twists and turns of the Georgian Military
Road. Though sunburned and exhausted, she could not sleep. Her long legs
twitched with every curve. At a piggish squeal of the nearly bald tires,
she pushed her hands back through short-cut brown hair and yawned
deliberately.

Lado sensed the silence had gone on too long. He glanced at Kaye with
soft brown eyes in a finely wrinkled sun-browned face, lifted his
cigarette over the steering wheel, and jutted out his chin. “In shit is
our salvation, yes?” he asked.

Kaye smiled despite herself. “Please don’t try to cheer me up,” she said.

Lado ignored that. “Good on us. Georgia has something to offer the
world. We have great sewage.” He rolled his rs elegantly, and “sewage”
came out see-yu-edge.

“Sewage,” she murmured. “Seee-yu-age.”

“I say it right?” Lado asked.

“Perfectly,” Kaye said.

Lado Jakeli was chief scientist at the Eliava Institute in Tbilisi,
where they extracted bacteriophages—viruses that attack only
bacteria—from local city and hospital sewage and farm waste, and from
specimens gathered around the world. Now, the West, including Kaye, had
come hat in hand to learn more from the Georgians about the curative
properties of phages.

 She had hit it off with the Eliava staff. After a week of conferences
and lab tours, some of the younger scientists had invited her to
accompany them to the rolling hills and brilliant green sheep fields at
the base of Mount Kazbeg.

Things had changed so quickly. Just this morning, Lado had driven all
the way from Tbilisi to their base camp near the old and solitary
Gergeti Orthodox church. In an envelope he had carried a fax from UN
Peacekeeping headquarters in Tbilisi, the capital.

Lado had downed a pot of coffee at the camp, then, ever the gentleman,
and her sponsor besides, had offered to take her to Gordi, a small town
seventy-five miles southwest of Kazbeg.

Kaye had had no choice. Unexpectedly, and at the worst possible time,
her past had caught up with her.

The UN team had gone through entry records to find non-Georgian medical
experts with a certain expertise. Hers was the only name that had come
up: Kaye Lang, thirty-four, partner with her husband, Saul Madsen, in
EcoBacter Research. In the early nineties, she had studied forensic
medicine at the State University of New York with an eye to going into
criminal investigation. She had changed her perspective within a year,
switching to microbiology, with emphasis on genetic engineering; but she
was the only foreigner in Georgia with even the slightest degree of the
training the UN needed.

Lado was driving her through some of the most beautiful countryside she
had ever seen. In the shadows of the central Caucasus they had passed
terraced mountain fields, small stone farmhouses, stone silos and
churches, small towns with wood and stone buildings, houses with
friendly and beautifully carved porches opening onto narrow brick or
cobble or dirt roads, towns dotted loosely on broad rumpled blankets of
sheep- and goat-grazed meadow and thick forest.

Here, even the seemingly empty expanses had been swarmed over and fought
for across the centuries, like every place she had seen in Western and
now Eastern Europe. Sometimes she felt suffocated by the sheer closeness
of her fellow humans, by the gap-toothed smiles of old men and women
standing by the side of the road watching traffic come and go from new
and unfamiliar worlds. Wrinkled friendly faces, gnarled hands waving at
the little car.

All the young people were in the cities, leaving the old to tend the
countryside, except in the mountain resorts. Georgia was planning to
turn itself into a nation of resorts. Her economy was growing in double
digits each year; her currency, the lari, was strengthening as well, and
had long since replaced rubles; soon it would replace Western dollars.
They were opening oil pipelines from the Caspian to the Black Sea; and
in the land where wine got its name, it was becoming a major export.

In the next few years, Georgia would export a new and very different
wine: solutions of phages to heal a world losing the war against
bacterial diseases.

The Fiat swung into the inside lane as they rounded a blind curve. Kaye
swallowed hard but said nothing. Lado had been very solicitous toward
her at the institute. At times in the past week, Kaye had caught him
looking at her with an expression of gnarled, old world speculation,
eyes drawn to wrinkled slits, like a satyr carved out of olive wood and
stained brown. He had a reputation among the women who worked at Eliava,
that he could not be trusted all the time, particularly with the young
ones. But he had always treated Kaye with the utmost civility, even, as
now, with concern. He did not want her to be sad, yet he could not think
of any reason she should be cheerful.

Despite its beauty, Georgia had many blemishes: civil war,
assassinations, and now, mass graves.

 

They lurched into a wall of rain. The windshield wipers flapped black
tails and cleaned about a third of Lado’s view. “Good on loseb Stalin,
he left us sewage,” he mused. “Good son of Georgia. Our most famous
export, better than wine.” Lado grinned falsely at her. He seemed both
ashamed and defensive. Kaye could not help but draw him out.

 “He killed millions,” she murmured. “He killed Dr. Eliava.”

Lado stared grimly through the streaks to see what lay beyond the short
hood. He geared down and braked, then careened around a ditch big enough
to hide a cow. Kaye made a small squeak and grabbed the side of her
seat. There were no guardrails on this stretch, and below the highway
yawned a steep drop of at least three hundred meters to a glacial melt
river. “It was Beria declared Dr. Eliava a People’s Enemy,” Lado said
matter-of-factly, as if relating old family history. “Beria was head of
Georgian KGB then, local child-abusing sonabitch, not mad wolf of all
Russia.”

“He was Stalin’s man,” Kaye said, trying to keep her mind off the road.
She could not understand any pride the Georgians took in Stalin.

“They were all Stalin’s men, or they died,” Lado said. He shrugged.
“There was a big stink here when Khruschev said Stalin was bad. What do
we know? He screwed us so many ways for so many years we thought he must
be a husband.”

This Kaye found amusing. Lado took encouragement from her grin.

“Some still want to return to prosperity under Communism. Or we have
prosperity in shit.” He rubbed his nose. “I’ll take the shit.”

They descended in the next hour into less fearsome foothills and
plateaus. Road signs in curling Georgian script showed the rusted pocks
of dozens of bullet holes. “Half an hour, no more,” Lado said.

The thick rain made the border between day and night difficult to judge.
Lado switched on the Fiat’s dim little headlights as they approached a
crossroads and the turnoff to the small town of Gordi.

Two armored personnel carriers flanked the highway just before the
crossroads. Five Russian peacekeepers dressed in slickers and rounded
piss-bucket helmets wearily flagged them down.

Lado braked the Fiat to a stop, canted slightly on the shoulder. Kaye
could see another ditch just yards ahead, right in the crotch of the
crossroads. They would have to drive on the shoulder to go around it.

Lado rolled down his window. A Russian soldier of nineteen or twenty,
with rosy choirboy cheeks, peered in. His helmet dribbled rain on Lado’s
sleeve. Lado spoke to him in Russian.

“American?” the young Russian asked Kaye. She showed him her passport,
her E.U. and C.I.S. business licenses, and the fax
requesting—practically ordering—her presence in Gordi. The soldier took
the fax and frowned as he tried to read it, getting it thoroughly wet.
He stepped back to consult with an officer squatting in the rear hatch
of the nearest carrier.

“They do not want to be here,” Lado muttered to Kaye. “And we do not
want them. But we asked for help...Who do we blame?”

The rain stopped. Kaye stared into the misting gloom ahead. She heard
crickets and birdsong above the engine whine.

“Go down, go left,” the soldier told Lado, proud of his English. He
smiled for Kaye’s benefit and waved them on to another soldier standing
like a fence post in the gray gloom beside the ditch. Lado engaged the
clutch and the little car bucked around the ditch, past the third
peacekeeper and onto the side road.

Lado opened the window all the way. Cool moist evening air swirled
through the car and lifted the short hair over Kaye’s neck. The
roadsides were covered with tight-packed birch. Briefly the air smelled
foul. They were near people. Then Kaye thought maybe it was not the
town’s sewage that smelled so. Her nose wrinkled and her stomach
knotted. But that was not likely. Their destination was a mile or so
outside the town, and Gordi was still at least two miles off the highway.

Lado came to a stream and slowly forded the quick-rushing shallow water.
The wheels sank to their hubcaps, but the car emerged safely and
continued on for another hundred meters. Stars peeked through
swift-gliding clouds. Mountains drew jagged dark blanks against the sky.
The forest came up and fell back and then they saw Gordi, stone
buildings, some newer two-story square wooden houses with tiny windows,
a single concrete municipal cube without decoration, roads of rutted
asphalt and old cobbles. No lights. Black sightless windows. The
electricity was out again.

“I don’t know this town,” Lado muttered. He slammed on the brakes,
jolting Kaye from a reverie. The car idled noisily in the small town
square, surrounded by two-story buildings. Kaye could make out a faded
Intourist sign over an inn named the Rustaveli Tiger.

Lado switched on the tiny overhead light and pulled out the faxed map.
He flung the map aside in disgust and heaved open the Fiat’s door. The
hinges made a loud metal groan. He leaned out and yelled in Georgian,
“Where is the grave?”

Darkness was its own excuse.

“Beautiful,” Lado said. He slammed the door twice to make it catch. Kaye
pressed her lips together firmly as the car lurched forward. They
descended with a high-pitched gnash of gears through a small street of
shops, dark and shuttered with corrugated steel, and out the back side
of the village, past two abandoned shacks, heaps of gravel, and
scattered bales of straw.

After a few minutes, they spotted lights and the glow of torches and a
single small campfire, then heard the racketing burr of a portable
generator and voices loud in the hollow of the night.

The grave was closer than the map had showed, less than a mile from the
town. She wondered if the villagers had heard the screams, or indeed if
there had been any screams.

The fun was over.

 

The UN team wore gas masks equipped with industrial aerosol filters.
Nervous Georgian Republic Security soldiers had to resort to bandannas
tied around their faces. They looked sinister, comically so under other
circumstances. Their officers wore white cloth surgical masks.

The head of the sakrebulo, the local council, a short big-fisted man
with a tall shock of wiry black hair and a prominent nose, stood with a
doggishly unhappy face beside the security officers.

The UN team leader, a U.S. Army colonel from South Carolina named
Nicholas Beck, made quick introductions and passed Kaye one of the UN
masks. She felt self-conscious but put it on. Beck’s aide, a black
female corporal named Hunter, passed her a pair of white latex surgical
gloves. They gave familiar slaps against her wrists as she tugged them on.

Beck and Hunter led Kaye and Lado away from the camp-fire and the white
Jeeps, down a small path through ragged forest and scrub to the graves.

“The council chief out there has his enemies. Some locals from the
opposition dug the trenches and then called UN headquarters in Tbilisi,”
Beck told her. “I don’t think the Republic Security folks want us here.
We can’t get any cooperation in Tbilisi. On short notice, you were the
only one we could find with any expertise.”

Three parallel trenches had been reopened and marked by electric lights
on tall poles, staked into the sandy soil and powered by a portable
generator. Between the stakes lengths of red and yellow plastic tape
hung lifeless in the still air.

Kaye walked around the first trench and lifted her mask. Wrinkling her
nose in anticipation, she sniffed. There was no distinct smell other
than dirt and mud.

“They’re more than two years old,” she said. She gave Beck the mask.
Lado stopped about ten paces behind them, reluctant to go near the graves.

“We need to be sure of that,” Beck said.

Kaye walked to the second trench, stooped, and played the beam of her
flashlight over the heaps of fabric and dark bones and dry dirt. The
soil was sandy and dry, possibly part of the bed of an old melt stream
from the mountains. The bodies were almost unrecognizable, pale brown
bone encrusted with dirt, wrinkled brown and black flesh. Clothing had
faded to the color of the soil, but these patches and shreds were not
army uniforms: they were dresses, pants, coats. Woolens and cottons had
not completely decayed. Kaye looked for brighter synthetics; they could
establish a maximum age for the grave. She could not immediately see any.

She moved the beam up to the walls of the trench. The thickest roots
visible, cut through by spades, were about half an inch in diameter. The
nearest trees stood like tall thin ghosts ten yards away.

A middle-aged Republic Security officer with the formidable name of
Vakhtang Chikurishvili, handsome in a burly way, with heavy shoulders
and a thick, often-broken nose, stepped forward. He was not wearing a
mask. He held up something dark. It took Kaye a few seconds to recognize
it as a boot. Chikurishvili addressed Lado in consonant-laden Georgian.

“He says the shoes are old,” Lado translated. “He says these people died
fifty years ago. Maybe more.”

Chikurishvili angrily swung his arm around and shot a quick stream of
mixed Georgian and Russian at Lado and Beck.

Lado translated. “He says the Georgians who dug this up are stupid. This
is not for the UN. This was from long before the civil war. He says
these are not Ossetians.”

“Who mentioned Ossetians?” Beck asked dryly.

Kaye examined the boot. It had a thick leather sole and leather uppers,
and its hanging strings were rotted and encrusted with powdery clods.
The leather was hard as a rock. She peered into the interior. Dirt, but
no socks or tissue—the boot had not been pulled from a decayed foot.
Chikurishvili met her querulous look defiantly, then whipped out a match
and lit up a cigarette.

Staged, Kaye thought. She remembered the classes she had taken in the
Bronx, classes that had eventually driven her from criminal medicine.
The field visits to real homicide scenes. The putrescence protection masks.

Beck spoke to the officer soothingly in broken Georgian and better
Russian. Lado gently retranslated his attempts. Beck then took Kaye’s
elbow and moved her to a long canvas canopy that had been erected a few
yards from the trenches.

Under the canopy, two battered folding card tables supported pieces of
bodies. Completely amateur, Kaye thought. Perhaps the enemies of the
head of the sakrebulo had laid out the bodies and taken pictures to
prove their point.

She circled the table: two torsos and a skull. There was a fair amount
of mummified flesh left on the torsos and some unfamiliar ligaments like
dark dry straps on the skull, around the forehead, eyes, and cheeks. She
looked for signs of insect casings and found dead blowfly larvae on one
withered throat, but not many. The bodies had been buried within a few
hours of death. She surmised they had not been buried in the dead of
winter, when blowflies were not about. Of course, winters at this
altitude were mild in Georgia.

She picked up a small pocket knife lying next to the closest torso and
lifted a shred of fabric, what had once been white cotton, then pried up
a stiff, concave flap of skin over the abdomen. There were bullet entry
holes in the fabric and skin overlying the pelvis. “God,” she said.

Within the pelvis, cradled in dirt and stiff wraps of dried tissue, lay
a smaller body, curled, little more than a heap of tiny bones, its skull
collapsed.

“Colonel.” She showed Beck. His face turned stony.

The bodies could conceivably have been fifty years old, but if so, they
were in remarkably good condition. Some wool and cotton remained.
Everything was very dry. Drainage swept around this area now. The
trenches were deep. But the roots—

Chikurishvili spoke again. His tone seemed more cooperative, even
guilty. There was a lot of guilt to go around over the centuries.

“He says they are both female,” Lado whispered to Kaye.

“I see that,” she muttered.

She walked around the table to examine the second torso. This one had no
skin over the abdomen. She scraped the dirt aside, making the torso rock
with a sound like a dried gourd. Another small skull lay within the
pelvis, a fetus about six months along, same as the other. The torso’s
limbs were missing; Kaye could not tell if the legs had been held
together in the grave. Neither of the fetuses had been expelled by
pressure of abdominal gases.

“Both pregnant,” she said. Lado translated this into Georgian.

Beck said in a low voice, “We count about sixty individuals. The women
seem to have been shot. It looks as if the men were shot or clubbed to
death.”

Chikurishvili pointed to Beck, and then back to the camp, and shouted,
his face ruddy in the backwash of flashlight glow. “Jugashvili, Stalin.”
The officer said the graves had been dug a few years before the great
People’s War, during the purges. The late 1930s. That would make them
almost seventy years old, ancient news, nothing for the UN to become
involved in.

Lado said, “He wants the UN and the Russians out of here. He says this
is an internal matter, not for peacekeepers.”

Beck spoke again, less soothingly, to the Georgian officer. Lado decided
he did not want to be in the middle of this exchange and walked around
to where Kaye was leaning over the second torso. “Nasty business,” he said.

“Too long,” Kaye spoke softly.

“What?” Lado asked.

“Seventy years is much too long,” she said. “Tell me what they’re
arguing about.” She prodded the unfamiliar straps of tissue around the
eye sockets with the pocket knife. They seemed to form a kind of mask.
Had they been hooded before being executed? She did not think so. The
attachments were dark and stringy and persistent.

“The UN man is saying there is no limit on war crimes,” Lado told her.
“No statue—what is it—statute of limitations.”

“He’s right,” Kaye said. She rolled the skull over gently. The occiput
had been fractured laterally and pushed in to a depth of three centimeters.

She returned her attention to the tiny skeleton cradled within the
pelvis of the second torso. She had taken some courses in embryology in
her second year in med school. The fetus’s bone structure seemed a
little odd, but she did not want to damage the skull by pulling it loose
from the caked soil and dried tissue. She had intruded enough already.

Kaye felt queasy, sickened not by the shriveled and dried remains, but
by what her imagination was already reconstructing. She straightened and
waved to get Beck’s attention.

“These women were shot in the stomach,” she said. Kill all the firstborn
children. Furious monsters. “Murdered.” She clamped her teeth.

“How long ago?”

“He may be right about the age of the boot, if it came from here, but
this grave isn’t that old. The roots around the edge of the trenches are
too small. My guess is the victims died as recently as two or three
years ago. The dirt here looks dry, but the soil is probably acid, and
that would dissolve any bones over a few years old. Then there’s the
fabric; it looks like wool and cotton, and that means the grave is just
a few years old. If it’s synthetic, it could be older, but that gives us
a date after Stalin, too.”

Beck approached her and lifted his mask. “Can you help us until the
others get here?” he asked in a whisper.

“How long?” Kaye asked.

“Four, five days,” Beck said. Several paces distant, Chikurishvili
shifted his gaze between them, jaw clenched, resentful, as if cops had
interrupted a domestic quarrel.

Kaye caught herself holding her breath. She turned away, stepped back,
sucked in some air, then asked, “You’re going to start a war crimes
investigation?”

“The Russians think we should,” Beck said. “They’re hot to discredit the
new Communists back home. A few old atrocities could supply them with
fresh ammunition. If you could give us a best guess—two years, five,
thirty, whatever?”

“Less than ten. Probably less than five. I’m very rusty,” she said. “I
can only do a few things. Take samples, some tissue specimens. Not a
full autopsy, of course.”

“You’re a thousand times better than letting the locals muck around,”
Beck said. “I don’t trust any of them. I’m not sure the Russians can be
trusted, either. They all have axes to grind, one way or the other.”

Lado kept a stiff face and did not comment, nor did he translate for
Chikurishvili.

Kaye felt what she had known would come, had dreaded: the old dark mood
creeping over her.

She had thought that by traveling and being away from Saul, she might
shake the bad times, the bad feelings. She had felt liberated watching
the doctors and technicians working at the Eliava Institute, doing so
much good with so few resources, literally pulling health out of sewage.
The grand and beautiful side of the Republic of Georgia. Now...Flip the
coin. Papa loseb Stalin or ethnic cleansers, Georgians trying to move
out Armenians and Ossetians, Abkhazis trying to move out Georgians,
Russians sending in troops, Chechens becoming involved. Dirty little
wars between ancient neighbors with ancient grievances.

This was not going to be good for her, but she could not refuse.

Lado wrinkled his face and stared up at Beck. “They were going to be
mothers?”

“Most of them,” Beck said. “And maybe some were going to be fathers.”


 

*3*

 

*The Alps*

The end of the cave was very cramped. Tilde lay under a low shelf of
rock, knees drawn up, and watched Mitch as he kneeled before the ones
they had come here to see. Franco squatted behind Mitch.

Mitch’s mouth hung half open, like a surprised little boy’s. He could
not speak for a time. The end of the cave was utterly still and quiet.
Only the beam of light moved as he played the torch up and down the two
forms.

“We touched nothing,” Franco said.

The blackened ashes, ancient fragments of wood, grass, and reed, looked
as if a breath would scatter them but still formed the remains of a
fire. The skin of the bodies had fared much better. Mitch had never seen
more startling examples of deep-freeze mummification. The tissues were
hard and dry, the moisture sucked from them by the dry deep cold air.
Near the heads, where they lay facing each other, the skin and muscle
had hardly shrunk at all before being fixed. The features were almost
natural, though the eyelids had withdrawn and the eyes beneath were
shrunken, dark, unutterably sleepy. The bodies as well were full; only
near the legs did the flesh seem to shrivel and darken, perhaps because
of the intermittent breeze from farther up the shaft. The feet were
wizened, black as little dried mushrooms.

Mitch could not believe what he was seeing. Perhaps there was nothing so
extraordinary about their pose—lying on their sides, a man and a woman
facing each other in death, freezing finally as the ashes of their last
fire cooled. Nothing unexpected about the hands of the man reaching
toward the face of the woman, the woman’s arms low in front of her as if
she had clasped her stomach. Nothing extraordinary about the animal skin
beneath them, or another skin rumpled beside the male, as if it had been
tossed aside.

In the end, with the fire out, freezing to death, the man had felt too
warm and had thrown off his covering.

Mitch looked down at the woman’s curled fingers and swallowed a rising
lump of emotion he could not easily define or explain.

“How old?” Tilde asked, interrupting his focus. Her voice sounded crisp
and clear and rational, like the ring of a struck knife.

Mitch jerked. “Very old,” he said quietly.

“Yes, but like the Iceman?”

“Not like the Iceman,” Mitch said. His voice almost broke.

The female had been injured. A hole had been punched in her side, at hip
level. Blood stains surrounded the hole and he thought he could make out
stains on the rock beneath her. Perhaps it had been the cause of her death.

There were no weapons in the cave.

He rubbed his eyes to force aside the little jagged white moon that
threatened to distract him, then looked at the faces again, short broad
noses pointing up at an angle. The woman’s jaw hung slack, the man’s was
closed. The woman had died gasping for air. Mitch could not know this
for sure, but he did not question the observation. It fit.

Only now did he carefully maneuver around the figures, crouched low,
moving so slowly, keeping his bent knees an inch above the man’s hip.

“They look old,” Franco said, just to make a sound in the cave. His eyes
glittered. Mitch glanced at him, then down at the male’s profile.

Thick brow ridge, broad flattened nose, no chin. Powerful shoulders,
narrowing to a comparatively slender waist. Thick arms. The faces were
smooth, almost hairless. All the skin below the neck, however, was
covered with a fine dark downy fur, visible only on close examination.
Around their temples, the short-trimmed hair seemed to have been shaved
in patterns, expertly barbered.

/So much for shaggy museum reconstructions./

Mitch bent closer, the cold air heavy in his nostrils, and propped his
hand against the top of the cave. Something like a mask lay between the
bodies, actually two masks, one beside and bunched under the man, the
other beneath the woman. The edges of the masks appeared torn. Each had
eye holes, nostrils, the appearance of an upper lip, all lightly covered
with fine hair, and below that, an even hairier flap that might have
once wrapped around the neck and lower jaw. They might have been lifted
from the faces, flayed away, yet there was no skin missing from the heads.

The mask nearest the woman seemed attached to her forehead and temple by
thin fibers like the beard of a mussel.

Mitch realized he was focusing on little mysteries to get past one big
impossibility.

“How old are they?” Tilde asked again. “Can you tell yet?”

“I don’t think there have been people like this for tens of thousands of
years,” Mitch said.

Tilde seemed to miss this statement of deep time. “They are European,
like the Iceman?”

“I don’t know,” Mitch said, but shook his head and held up his hand. He
did not want to talk; he wanted to think. This was an extremely
dangerous place, professionally, mentally, from any angle of approach.
Dangerous and dreamlike and impossible.

“Tell me, Mitch,” Tilde pleaded with surprising gentleness. “Tell me
what you see.” She reached out to stroke his knee. Franco observed this
caress with maturity.

Mitch began, “They are male and female, each about a hundred and sixty
centimeters in height.”

“Short people,” Franco said, but Mitch talked right over him.

“They appear to be genus Homo, species sapiens. Not like us, though.
They might have suffered from some kind of dwarfism, distortion of the
features...” He stopped himself and looked again at the heads, saw no
signs of dwarfism, though the masks bothered him.

The classic features. “They’re not dwarfs,” he said. “They’re Neandertals.”

Tilde coughed. The dry air parched their throats. “Pardon?”

“Cavemen?” Franco said.

“Neandertals,” Mitch said again, as much to convince himself as to
correct Franco.

“That is bullshit,” Tilde said, her voice crackling with anger. “We are
not children.”

“No bullshit. You have found two well-preserved Neandertals, a man and a
woman. The first Neandertal mummies...anywhere. Ever.”

Tilde and Franco thought about that for a few seconds. Outside, wind
hooted past the cave entrance.

“How old?” Franco asked.

“Everyone thinks the Neandertals died out between a hundred thousand and
forty thousand years ago,” Mitch said. “Maybe everyone is wrong. But I
doubt they could have stayed in this cave, in this state of
preservation, for forty thousand years.”

“Maybe they were the last,” Franco said, and crossed himself reverently.

“Incredible,” Tilde said, her face flushed. “How much would they be worth?”

Mitch’s leg cramped and he moved back to squat beside Franco. He rubbed
his eyes with a gloved knuckle. So cold. He was shivering. The moon of
light blurred and shifted. “They’re not worth anything,” he said.

“Don’t joke,” Tilde said. “They are rare—nothing like them, right?”

“Even if we—if you, I mean—could get them out of this cave safely,
intact, and down the mountain, where would you sell them?”

 “There are people who collect such things,” Franco said. “People with
lots of money. We have talked to some about an Iceman already. Surely an
Iceman and woman—”

“Maybe I should be more blunt,” Mitch said. “If these aren’t handled in
a proper scientific fashion, I will go to the authorities in
Switzerland, Italy, wherever the hell we are. I will tell them.”

Another silence. Mitch could almost hear Tilde’s thoughts, like a little
Austrian clockwork.

Franco slapped the floor of the cave with his gloved hand and glared at
Mitch. “Why fuck us up?”

“Because these people don’t belong to you,” Mitch said. “They don’t
belong to anybody.”

“They are dead!” Franco shouted. “They do not belong to themselves, do
they, anymore?”

Tilde’s lips formed a straight, grim line. “Mitch is right. We are not
going to sell them.”

A little scared now, Mitch’s next words rushed out. “I don’t know what
else you might plan to do with them, but I don’t think you’re going to
control them, or sell the rights, make Caveman Barbie dolls or
whatever.” He took a deep breath.

“No, again, I say Mitch is right,” Tilde stated slowly. Franco regarded
her with a speculative squint. “This is very huge. We will be good
citizens. They are everybody’s ancestors. Mama and Papa to the world.”

Mitch could definitely feel the headache creeping up. The earlier oblong
of light had been a familiar warning: oncoming head-crushing train.
Climbing back down the mountain would be difficult or even impossible if
he was going to fall under the spell of a migraine, a real
brain-splitter. He hadn’t brought any medicine. “Are you planning to
kill me up here?” he asked Tilde.

Franco shot a glance at him, then rolled to look at Tilde, waiting for
an answer.

Tilde grinned and tapped her chin. “I am thinking,” she said. “What
rogues we would be. Famous stories. Pirates of the prehistoric. Yo ho ho
and a bottle of Schnapps.”

“What we need to do,” Mitch said, assuming that she had answered in the
negative, “is to take a tissue sample from each body, with minimal
intrusion. Then—”

He reached for the torch and shone the light beyond the close,
sleepy-eyed heads of the male and female to the far recesses, about
three yards farther back in the cave. Something small lay there, bundled
in fur.

“What’s that?” he and Franco asked simultaneously.

Mitch considered. He could hunker and sidle his way around the female
without disturbing anything except the dust. On the other hand, it would
be best to leave everything completely untouched, to retreat from the
cave now and bring back the real experts. The tissue samples would be
enough evidence, he thought. Enough was known about Neandertal DNA from
bone studies. A confirmation could be made and the cave could be kept
sealed until—

He pressed his temples and closed his eyes.

Tilde tapped his shoulder and gently pushed him out of the way. “I am
smaller,” she said. She crawled beside the female toward the rear of the
cave.

Mitch watched and said nothing. This was what it felt like to truly
sin—the sin of overwhelming curiosity. He would never forgive himself,
but, he rationalized, how could he stop her without harming the bodies?
Besides, she was being careful.

Tilde squeezed so low her face was on the floor beside the bundle. She
gripped one end of the fur with two fingers and slowly turned it around.
Mitch’s throat seized with anguish. “Shine a light,” she demanded. Mitch
did so.

Franco aimed his torch as well.

“It’s a doll,” Tilde said.

From the top of the bundle peered a small face, like a dark and wrinkled
apple, with two tiny sunken black eyes.

“No,” Mitch said. “It’s a baby.”

Tilde pushed back a few inches and made a small surprised hmml

Mitch’s headache rolled over him like thunder.

 

Franco held Mitch’s arm near the cave entrance. Tilde was still inside.
Mitch’s migraine had progressed to a real Force 9, with visuals and all,
and it was an effort to keep from curling up and screaming. He had
already experienced dry heaves, by the side of the cave, and he was now
shivering violently.

He knew with absolute certainty that he was going to die up here, on the
threshold of the most extraordinary anthropological discovery of all
time, leaving it in the hands of Tilde and Franco, who were little
better than thieves.

“What is she doing in there?” Mitch moaned, head bowed. Even the
twilight seemed too bright. It was getting dark quickly, however.

“Not your worry,” Franco said, and gripped his arm more tightly.

Mitch pulled back and felt blindly in his pocket for the vials
containing the samples. He had managed to take two small plugs from the
upper thighs of the man and the woman before the pain had peaked; now,
he could hardly see straight.

Forcing his eyes open, he looked out upon a heavenly sapphire blueness
precisely painting the mountain, the ice, the snow, overlain by flashes
in the corners of his eyes like tiny bolts of lightning.

Tilde emerged from the cave, camera in one hand, pack in the other. “We
have enough to prove everything,” she said. She spoke Italian to Franco,
rapidly and in a low voice. Mitch did not understand, nor did he care to.

He simply wanted to get down the mountain and climb into a warm bed and
sleep, to wait for the extraordinary pain, all too familiar but ever
fresh and new, to subside.

Dying was another option, not without its attractions.

Franco roped him up deftly. “Come, old friend,” the Italian said with a
kindly jerk on the rope. Mitch lurched forward, clenching his fists by
his sides to keep from pounding his head. “The ax,” Tilde said, and
Franco slipped Mitch’s ice ax out of his belt, where it tangled with his
legs, and into his pack. “You are in bad shape,” Franco said. Mitch
clenched his eyes shut; the twilight was filled with lightning, and the
thunder was pain, a silent crushing of his head with every step. Tilde
took the lead and Franco followed close behind. “Different way,” Tilde
said. “It’s icing badly and the bridge is rotten.”

Mitch opened his eyes. The arete was a rusty knife edge of carbon shadow
against the purest ultramarine sky, fading to starry black. Each breath
was colder and harder to take. He sweated profusely.

He plodded automatically, tried to descend a rock slope dotted with
patches of crunchy snow, slipped and caught on the rope, dragging Franco
a couple of yards down the slope. The Italian did not protest, instead
rearranged the rope around Mitch and soothed him like a child. “Okay,
old friend. This is better. This is better. Watch the step.” “I can’t
stand it much more, Franco,” Mitch whispered. “I haven’t had a migraine
for over two years. I didn’t even bring pills.” “Never mind. Just watch
your feet and do what I say.” Franco shouted ahead to Tilde. Mitch felt
her near and squinted up at her. Her face was framed with clouds and his
own lights and sparks. “Snow coming,” she said. “We have to hurry.” They
spoke in Italian and German and Mitch thought they were talking about
leaving him here on the ice. “I can go,” he said. “I can walk.” So they
began walking again on the glacier slope, accompanied by the sound of
the ice fall as the slow ancient river flowed on, splitting and booming,
rattling and cracking on its descent. Somewhere giant hands seemed to
applaud. The wind picked up and Mitch turned away from it. Franco turned
him around again and pushed less gently. “No time for stupidity, old
friend. Walk.” “I’m trying.” “Just walk.” The wind became a fist pressed
against his face. He leaned into it. Ice crystals stung his cheeks and
he tried to pull up his hood and his fingers were like sausages in his
gloves. “He can’t do this,” Tilde said, and Mitch saw her walk around
him, wrapped in swirling snow. The snow straightened suddenly and they
all jerked as the wind grabbed them. Franco’s torch illuminated millions
of flakes whipping past in horizontal streaks. They discussed building a
snow cave, but the ice was too hard, it would take too long to dig out.
“Go! Just head down!” Franco shouted at Tilde, and she mutely complied.
Mitch did not know where they were going, did not much care. Franco
cursed steadily in Italian but the wind drowned him out, and Mitch, as
he dragged forward, pulling up and putting down his boots, digging in
his crampons, trying to stay upright, Mitch knew that Franco was there
only by his pressure on the ropes. “The gods are angry!” Tilde yelled, a
cry half triumphant, half jesting, with high excitement and even
exaltation. Franco must have fallen, because Mitch found himself being
tugged hard from the rear. He had somehow come to be holding his ax and
as he went over, he fell on his stomach and had the clarity of will to
dig the ax into the ice and stop his descent. Franco seemed to dangle
for a moment, a few yards down the slope. Mitch looked in that
direction. The lights were gone from his vision. Somehow he was
freezing, really freezing, and that was allaying the pain of his
migraine. Franco was not visible in the straight parallel bands of snow.
The wind whistled and then shrieked and Mitch pulled his face close to
the ice. His ax slipped from its hole and he slid two or three yards.
With the pain fading, he wondered how he might get out of this alive. He
dug his crampons into the ice and pulled himself back up the slope, by
main force dragging Franco with him. Tilde helped Franco get to his
feet. His nose was bloody and he seemed stunned. He must have hit his
head on the ice. Tilde glanced at Mitch. She smiled and touched his
shoulder. So friendly. Nobody said anything. Sharing the pain and the
creeping evil warmth made them very close. Franco made a sobbing,
sucking sound, licked at his bloody lip, pulled their ropes closer. They
were so exposed. The fall cracked above the shrieking wind, boomed,
snapped, made a sound like a tractor on a gravel road. Mitch felt the
ice beneath him shudder. They were too close to the fall and it was
really active, making a lot of noise. He pulled on the ropes to Tilde
and they came back loose, cut. He pulled on the ropes behind him. franco
stumped out of the wind and snow, his face covered with blood, his eyes
glaring behind his goggles. Franco knelt beside Mitch and then leaned
over on his gloved hands, rolled to one side. Mitch grabbed his shoulder
but Franco refused to budge. Mitch got up and faced downslope. The wind
blew from up the slope and he keeled forward. He tried it again, leaning
backward awkwardly, and fell. Crawling was the only option. He dragged
Franco behind him, but that was impossible after a few feet. He crawled
back to Franco and began to push him. The ice was rough, not slick, and
did not help. Mitch did not know what to do. They had to get out of the
wind, but he could not see well enough where they were to choose any
particular direction. He was glad Tilde had abandoned them. She could
get away now and maybe someone would make babies with her, neither of
them of course; they were now out of the old evolutionary loop. All
responsibility shed. He felt sorry that Franco was so banged up. “Hey,
old friend,” he shouted into the man’s ear. “Wake up and give me some
help or we’re going to die.” Franco did not respond. It was possible he
was dead already, but Mitch did not think a simple fall could kill
someone. Mitch found the torch around Franco’s wrist, removed it,
switched it on, peered into Franco’s eyes as he tried to open them with
his gloved fingers, not easy, but the pupils were small and uneven. Yup.
He had pranged himself hard on the ice, causing concussion and
flattening his nose. That was where all the new blood was coming from.
The blood and snow made a red messy slush on Franco’s face. Mitch gave
up talking to him. He thought about cutting himself loose, but couldn’t
bring himself to do that. Franco had treated him well. Rivals united on
the ice by death. Mitch doubted any woman would really feel a romantic
pang, hearing about this. In his experience, women did not much care
about such things. Dying, yes, but not the camaraderie of men. So
confusing now and warming rapidly. His coat was very warm, as was his
snow pants. Topping it off was that he had to pee. Death with dignity
was apparently out of the question. Franco groaned. No, it wasn’t
Franco. The ice beneath them vibrated, then jumped, and they tumbled and
slid to one side. Mitch caught sight of the torch beam illuminating a
big block of ice rising, or they were falling. Yes, indeed, and he
closed his eyes in anticipation. But he did not hit his head, though all
the breath was slammed out of him. They landed in snow and the wind
stopped. Clumped snow fell on them, and a couple of heavy chunks of ice
pinned Mitch’s leg. It got quiet and still. Mitch tried to lift his leg
but soft warmth resisted and the other leg was stiff. It was decided.

In no time at all, he opened his eyes wide to the sky-spanning glare of
a blinding blue sun.


 

 

*4*

* *

*Gordi*

Gordi Lado, shaking his head in sad embarrassment, left Kaye in Beck’s
care to return to Tbilisi. He could not be away from the Eliava
Institute for long.

The UN took over the small Rustaveli Tiger in Gordi, renting all of the
rooms. The Russians pitched more tents and slept between the village and
the graves.

Under the pained but smiling attention of the innkeeper, a stout
black-haired woman named Lika, the UN peacekeepers ate a late supper of
bread and tripe soup, served with big glasses of vodka. Everyone retired
to bed shortly after, except for Kaye and Beck.

Beck pulled a chair up to the wooden table and placed a glass of white
wine in front of her. She had not touched the vodka.

“This is Manavi. Best they have here—for us, at any rate.” Beck sat and
directed a belch into his fist. “Excuse me. What do you know about
Georgian history?”

“Not a lot,” Kaye said. “Recent politics. Science.”

Beck nodded and folded his arms. “Our dead mothers,” he said, “could
conceivably have been murdered during the troubles—the civil war. But I
don’t know of any actions in or around Gordi.” He made a dubious face.
“They could be victims from the 1930s, the ‘40s, or the 1950s. But you
say no. Good point about the roots.” He rubbed his nose and then
scratched his chin. “For such a beautiful country, there’s a fair amount
of grim history.”

Beck reminded Kaye of Saul. Most men his age somehow reminded Kaye of
Saul, twelve years her senior, back on Long Island, far away in more
than just distance. Saul the brilliant, Saul the weak, Saul whose mind
creaked more every month. She sat up and stretched her arms, scraping
the legs of her chair against the tile floor.

“I’m more interested in her future,” Kaye said. “Half the pharmaceutical
and medical companies in the United States are making pilgrimages here.
Georgia’s expertise could save millions.”

“Helpful viruses.”

“Right,” Kaye said. “Phages.”

“Attack only bacteria.”

Kaye nodded.

“I read that Georgian troops carried little vials filled with phages
during the troubles,” Beck said. “They swallowed them if they were going
into battle, or sprayed them on wounds or burns before they could get to
hospital.”

Kaye nodded. “They’ve been using phage therapy since the twenties, when
Felix d’Herelle came here to work with George Eliava. D’Herelle was
sloppy; the results were mixed back then, and soon enough we had sulfa
and then penicillin. We’ve pretty much ignored phages until now. So we
end up with deadly bacteria resistant to all known antibiotics. But not
to phages.”

Through the window of the small lobby, over the roofs of the low houses
across the street, she could see the mountains gleaming in the
moonlight. She wanted to go to sleep but knew she would lie awake in the
small hard bed for hours.

“Here’s to the prettier future,” Beck said. He lifted his glass and
drained it. Kaye took a sip. The wine’s sweetness and acidity made a
lovely balance, like tart apricots.

“Dr. Jakeli told me you were climbing Kazbeg,” Beck said. “Taller than
Mont Blanc. I’m from Kansas. No mountains at all. Hardly any rocks.” He
smiled down at the table, as if embarrassed to meet her gaze. “I love
mountains. I apologize for dragging you away from your business...and
your pleasure.”

“I wasn’t climbing,” she said. “Just hiking.”

“I’ll try to have you out of here in a few days,” Beck said. “Geneva has
records of missing persons and possible massacres. If there’s a match
and we can date it to the thirties, we’ll hand it over to the Georgians
and the Russians.” Beck wanted the graves to be old, and she could
hardly blame him.

“What if it’s recent?” Kaye asked.

“We’ll bring in a full investigation team from Vienna.”

Kaye gave him a clear, no-nonsense look. “It’s recent,” she said.

Beck finished off his glass, stood, and clutched the back of his chair
with his hands. “I agree,” he said with a sigh. “What made you give up
on criminology? If I’m not intruding...”

“I learned too much about people,” Kaye said. /Cruel, rotten, dirty,
desperately stupid people/. She told Beck about the Brooklyn homicide
lieutenant who had taught her class. He had been a devout Christian.
Showing them pictures of a particularly horrendous crime scene, with two
dead men, three dead women, and a dead child, he had told the students,
“The souls of these victims are no longer in their bodies. Don’t
sympathize with them. Sympathize with the ones left behind. Get over it.
Get to work. And remember: you work for God.”

“His beliefs kept him sane,” Kaye said.

“And you? Why did you change your major?”

“I didn’t believe,” Kaye said.

Beck nodded, flexed his hands on the back of the chair. “No armor. Well,
do your best. You’re all we’ve got for the time being.” He said good
night and walked to the narrow stairs, climbing with a fast, light tread.

Kaye sat at the table for several minutes, then stepped through the
inn’s front door. She stood on the granite flagstone step beside the
narrow cobbled street and inhaled the night air, with its faint odor of
town sewage. Over the rooftop of the house opposite the inn she could
see the snow-capped crest of a mountain, so clear she could almost reach
out and touch it.

 

In the morning, she came awake wrapped in warm sheets and a blanket that
hadn’t been laundered in some time. She stared at a few stray hairs, not
her own, trapped in the thick gray wool near her face. The small wooden
bed with carved and red-painted posts occupied a plaster-walled room
about eight feet wide and ten feet long, with a single window behind the
bed, a single wooden chair, and a plain oak table bearing a washstand.
Tbilisi had modern hotels, but Gordi was away from the new tourist
trails, too far off the Military Road.

She slipped out of bed, splashed water on her face, and pulled on her
denims and blouse and coat. She was reaching for the iron latch when she
heard a heavy knock. Beck called her name. She opened the door and
blinked at him owlishly.

“They’re running us out of town,” he said, his face hard. “They want all
of us back in Tbilisi by tomorrow.”

“Why?”

“We’re not wanted. Regular army soldiers are here to escort us. I’ve
told them you’re a civilian advisor and not a member of the team. They
don’t care.”

“Jesus,” Kaye said. “Why the turnaround?”

Beck made a disgusted face. “The /sakrebulo/, the council, I presume.
Nervous about their nice little community. Or maybe it comes from higher
up.”

“Doesn’t sound like the new Georgia,” Kaye said. She was concerned about
how this might affect her work with the institute.

“I’m surprised, too,” Beck said. “We’ve stepped on somebody’s toes.
Please pack your case and join us downstairs.”

He turned to go, but Kaye took his arm. “Are the phones working?”

“I don’t know,” he said. “You’re welcome to use one of our satellite
phones.”

“Thanks. And—Dr. Jakeli is back in Tbilisi by now. I’d hate to make him
drive out here again.”

“We’ll take you to Tbilisi,” Beck said. “If that’s where you want to go.”

Kaye said, “That’ll be fine.”

 

The white UN Cherokees gleamed in the bright sun outside the inn. Kaye
peered at them through the window panes of the lobby and waited for the
innkeeper to bring out an antiquated black dial phone and plug it into
the jack by the front desk. She picked up the receiver, listened to it,
then handed it to Kaye: dead. In a few more years, Georgia would catch
up with the twenty-first century. For now, there were less than a
hundred lines to the outside world, and with all calls routed through
Tbilisi, service was sporadic.

The innkeeper smiled nervously. She had been nervous since they arrived.

Kaye carried her bag outside. The UN team had assembled, six men and
three women. Kaye stood beside a Canadian woman named Doyle, while
Hunter brought out the satellite phone.

First Kaye made a call to Tbilisi to speak with Tamara Miri-anishvili,
her main contact at the institute. After several tries, the call went
through. Tamara sympathized and wondered what the fuss was about, then
said Kaye was welcome to come back and stay a few more days. “It is
shameful, to push your nose into this. We’ll have fun, make you cheerful
again,” Tamara said.

“Have there been any calls from Saul?” Kaye asked.

“Twice he calls,” Tamara said. “He says ask more about biofilms. How do
phages work in biofilms, when the bacteria get all socialized.”

“And are you going to tell us?” Kaye asked in jest.

Tamara gave her a tinkling, sunny laugh. “Must we tell you all our
secrets? We have no contracts yet, Kaye dear!”

“Saul’s right. It could be a big issue,” Kaye said. Even at the worst of
times, Saul was on track with their science and their business.

“Come back, and I’ll show you some of our biofilm research, special,
just because you are nice,” Tamara said.

“Wonderful.”

Kaye thanked Tamara and handed the phone back to the corporal.

A Georgian staff car, an old black Volga, arrived with several army
officers, who exited on the left side. Major Chikur-ishvili of the
security forces stepped out from the right, his face stormier than ever.
He looked like he might explode in a cloud of blood and spit.

A young army officer—Kaye had no idea what rank— approached Beck and
spoke to him in broken Russian. When they were finished, Beck waved his
hand and the UN team climbed into their Jeeps. Kaye rode in the Jeep
with Beck.

As they drove west out of Gordi, a few of the townspeople gathered to
watch them leave. A little girl stood beside a plastered stone wall and
waved: brown-haired, tawny, gray-eyed, strong and lovely. A perfectly
normal and delightful little girl.

 

There was little conversation as Hunter drove them south along the
highway, leading the small caravan. Beck stared thoughtfully ahead. The
stiff-sprung Jeep bounced over bumps and dropped into ruts and swerved
around potholes.

Riding in the right rear seat, Kaye thought she might be getting
carsick. The radio played pop tunes from Alania and pretty good blues
from Azerbaijan and then an incomprehensible talk show that Beck
occasionally found amusing. He glanced back at Kaye and she tried to
smile bravely.

After a few hours she dozed off and dreamed of bacterial buildups inside
the bodies within the trench graves. Biofilms, what most people thought
of as slime: little industrious bacterial cities reducing these corpses,
these once-living giant evolutionary offspring, back to their native
materials. Lovely polysaccharide architectures being laid down within
the interior channels, the gut and lungs, the heart and arteries and
eyes and brain, the bacteria giving up their wild ways and becoming
citified, recycling all; great garbage dump cities of bacteria,
cheerfully ignorant of philosophy and history and the character of the
dead hulks they now reclaimed.

/Bacteria made us. They take us back in the end. Welcome home./

She woke up in a sweat. The air was getting warmer as they descended
into a long, deep valley. How nice it would be to know nothing about all
the inner workings. Animal innocence; the unexamined life is the
sweetest. But things go wrong and prompt introspection and examination.
The root of all awareness.

“Dreaming?” Beck asked her as they pulled over near a small filling
station and garage clapped together from sheets of corrugated metal.

“Nightmares,” Kaye said. “Too much into my work, I guess.”


 

 

*5*

* *

* *

*Innsbruck, Austria*

Mitch saw the blue sun swing around and darken and he assumed it was
night, but the air was dim green and not at all cold. He felt a prick of
pain in his upper thigh, a general sense of unease in his stomach.

He wasn’t on the mountain. He tried to blink the gunk from his eyes and
reached up to rub his face. A hand stopped him and a soft female voice
told him in German to be a good boy. As she wiped his forehead with a
cold damp cloth, the woman said, in English, that he was a little
chapped and his nose and fingers were frostbitten and that he had a
broken leg. A few minutes later he went to sleep again.

No time at all after that, he awoke and managed to sit up in a crisp,
firm hospital bed. He was in a room with four other patients, two beside
him and two across from him, all male, all less than forty years old.
Two had broken legs in movie-comedy slings. The other two had broken
arms. Mitch’s own leg was in a cast but not in a sling.

All the men were blue-eyed, wiry, handsome in an aquiline way, with thin
necks and long jaws. They watched him attentively.

Mitch saw the room clearly now: painted concrete walls, white enameled
bed frames, a portable lamp on a chromed stand that he had mistaken for
a blue sun, mottled brown tile floor, the dusty smell of steam heat and
antiseptic, a general odor of peppermint.

On Mitch’s right, a heavily snow-burned young man, skin peeling from his
baby-pink cheeks, leaned over to say, “You are the lucky American, are
you not?” The pulley and weights on his elevated leg creaked.

“I’m American,” Mitch croaked. “I must be lucky because I’m not dead.”

The men exchanged solemn glances. Mitch could see he had been a topic of
conversation for some time.

“We all agree, it is best for fellow mountaineers to inform you.”

Before Mitch could protest that he was not really a mountaineer, the
snow-burned young man told him that his companions were dead. “The
Italian you were found with, in the serac, he is broken-neck. And the
woman is found much lower down, buried in ice.” Then, his eyes sharply
inquisitive—eyes the color of the wild-dog sky Mitch had first seen over
the arete—the young man asked, “The newspapers say, the TV say. Where
did she get the little corpse baby?”

Mitch coughed. He saw a pitcher of water on a tray by his bed and poured
a glass. The mountaineers watched him like athletic elves trussed up in
their beds.

Mitch returned their gazes. He tried to hide his dismay. It did him no
good to judge Tilde now; no good at all.

 

The inspector from Innsbruck arrived at noon and sat beside his bed with
an attending local police officer to ask questions. The officer spoke
better English and translated for him. Their questions were routine, the
inspector said, all part of the accident report. Mitch told them he did
not know who the woman was, and the inspector responded, after a decent
pause, that they had all been seen together in Salzburg. “You and Franco
Maricelli and Mathilda Berger.”

“That was Franco’s girlfriend,” he said, feeling sick, trying not to
show it. The inspector sighed and pursed his lips disapprovingly, as if
this was all very trivial and only a little irritating.

 “She was carrying the mummy of an infant. Perhaps a very old mummy. You
have no idea where she got it?”

He hoped the police had not gone through his effects and found the vials
and recognized their contents. Perhaps he had lost the pack on the
glacier. “It’s too bizarre for words,” he said.

The inspector shrugged. “I am not an expert on bodies in the ice.
Mitchell, I give you some fatherly advice. I am old enough?”

Mitch admitted the inspector might be old enough. The mountaineers did
not even attempt to hide their interest in the proceedings.

“We have spoken to your former employers, the Hayer Museum, in Seattle.”

Mitch blinked slowly.

“They tell us you were involved in the theft of antiquities from the
federal government, the skeletal remains of an Indian, called Pasco man,
very old. Ten thousand years, found on the banks of the Columbia River.
You refused to hand over these remains to the Army Corpse of Engineers.”

“Corps,” Mitch said softly.

“So they arrest you under an antiquities act, and the museum fires you
because there is so much publicity.”

“The Indians claimed the bones belonged to an ancestor,” Mitch said, his
face flushing with anger at the memory. “They wanted to bury them again.”

The inspector read from his notes. “You were denied access to your
collections in the museum, and the bones were confiscated from your
house. With many photographs and more publicity.”

“It was legal bullshit! The Army Corps of Engineers had no right to
those bones. They were scientifically invaluable—”

“Like this mummified baby from the ice, perhaps?” the inspector asked.

Mitch closed his eyes and looked away. He could see it all very clearly
now. /Stupid is not the word. This is fate, pure and simple./

“You are going to throw up?” the inspector asked, backing away.

Mitch shook his head.

“Already it is known—you were seen with the woman in the Braunschweiger
Hiitte, not ten kilometers from where you were found. A striking woman,
beautiful and blond, observers say.”

The mountaineers nodded at this, as if they had been there.

“It is best you tell us everything and we hear it first. I will tell the
police in Italy, and the police here in Austria will interview you and
maybe it will all be nothing.”

“They were acquaintances,” he said. “She was—used to be—my girlfriend. I
mean, we were lovers.”

“Yes. Why did she return to you?”

“They had found something. She thought I might be able to tell them what
they had found.”

“Yes?”

Mitchell realized he had no choice. He drank another glass of water,
then told the inspector most of what had happened, as precisely and
clearly as he could. Since they had not mentioned the vials, he did not
mention them, either. The officer took notes and recorded his confession
on a small tape machine.

When he was finished, the inspector said, “Someone is sure to want to
know where this cave is.”

“Tilde—Mathilda had a camera,” Mitch said wearily. “She took pictures.”

“We found no camera. It might go much easier if you know where the cave
is. Such a find...very exciting.”

“They have the baby already,” Mitch said. “That should be exciting
enough. A Neandertal infant.”

The inspector made a doubtful face. “Nobody says anything about
Neandertal. So maybe this is a delusion or joke?”

Mitch was long past losing everything he cared about— his career, his
standing as a paleontologist. Once more he had screwed things up
royally. “Maybe it was the headache.

I’m just groggy. Of course, I’ll help them find the cave,” he said.

“Then there is no crime, merely tragedy.” The inspector rose to leave,
and the officer tipped his cap good-bye.

After they were gone, the mountaineer with the peeling cheeks told him,
“You are not going home soon.”

“The mountains want you back,” said the least snow-burned of the four,
across the room from Mitch, and nodded sagely, as if that explained
everything.

“Screw you,” Mitch muttered. He rolled over in the crisp white bed.


 

 

*6*

* *

* *

*Eliava Institute, Tbilisi*

Lado and Tamara and Zamphyra and seven other scientists and students
gathered around the two wooden tables on the south end of the main
laboratory building. They all lifted their beakers of brandy in toast to
Kaye. Candles flickered around the room, reflecting the golden sparkles
within the amber-filled glassware. The meal was only halfway finished,
and this was the eighth round Lado had led this evening, as tamada,
toastmaster, for the occasion. “For darling Kaye,” Lado said, “who
values our work...and promises to make us rich!”

Rabbits, mice, and chickens watched with sleepy eyes from their cages
behind the table. Long black benches covered with glassware and racks
and incubators and computers hooked to sequencers and analyzers
retreated into the gloom at the unlighted end of the lab.

“To Kaye,” Tamara added, “who has seen more of what Sakarrvelo, of
Georgia, has to offer...than we might wish. A brave and understanding
woman.”

“What are you, toastmisrress?” Lado demanded in irritation. “Why remind
us of unpleasant things?”

“What are you, talking of riches, of money, at a time like this?” Tamara
snapped back.

“I am tamada\” Lado roared, standing beside the oak folding table and
waving his sloshing glass at the students and scientists. Above slow
smiles, none of them said a word in disagreement.

“All right,” Tamara conceded. “Your wish is our command.”

“They have no respect!” Lado complained to Kaye. “Will prosperity
destroy tradition?”

The benches made crowded Vs in Kaye’s narrowing perspective. The
equipment was hooked into a generator that chugged softly out in the
yard beside the building. Saul had supplied two sequencers and a
computer; the generator had been supplied by Aventis, a huge multinational.

City power from Tbilisi had been shut off since late that afternoon.
They had cooked the farewell dinner over Bunsen burners and in a gas oven.

“Go ahead, toastmaster,” Zamphyra said in affectionate resignation. She
waved her fingers at Lado.

“I will.” Lado put down his glass and smoothed his suit. His dark
wrinkled face, red as a beet with mountain sunburn, gleamed in the
candlelight like rich wood. He reminded Kaye of a toy troll she had
loved as a child. From a box concealed under the table he brought out a
small crystal glass, intricately cut and beveled. He took a beautiful
silver-chased ibex horn and walked to a large amphora propped in a
wooden crate in the near corner, behind the table. The amphora, recently
pulled from the earth of his own small vineyard outside Tbilisi, was
filled with some immense quantity of wine. He lifted a ladle from the
amphora’s mouth and poured it slowly into the horn, then again, and
again, seven times, until the horn was full. He swirled the wine gently
to let it breathe. Red liquid sloshed over his wrist.

Finally, he filled the glass to the brim from the horn, and handed it to
Kaye. “If you were a man,” he said, “I would ask you to drink the entire
horn, and give us a toast.”

“Lado!” Tamara howled, slapping his arm. He almost dropped the horn, and
turned on her in mock surprise.

“What?” he demanded. “Is the glass not beautiful?”

Zamphyra rose to her feet beside the table to waggle a finger at him.
Lado grinned more broadly, transformed from a troll into a carmine
satyr. He turned slowly toward Kaye.

“What can I do, dear Kaye?” Lado said with a flourish. More wine dripped
from the tip of the horn. “They demand that you must drink all of this.”

Kaye had already had her fill of alcohol and did not trust herself to
stand. She felt deliciously warm and safe, among friends, surrounded by
an ancient darkness thick with amber and golden stars.

She had almost forgotten the graves and Saul and the difficulties
awaiting her in New York.

She held out her hands, and Lado danced forward with surprising grace,
belying his clumsiness of a few moments before. Not spilling a drop, he
deposited the ibex horn into her hands.

“Now, you,” he said.

Kaye knew what was expected. She rose solemnly. Lado had delivered many
toasts that evening that had rambled poetically and with no end of
invention for long minutes. She doubted she could equal his eloquence,
but she would do her best, and she had many things to say, things that
had buzzed in her head for the two days since she had come down from Kazbeg.

“There is no land on Earth like the home of wine,” she began, and lifted
the horn high. All smiled and raised their beakers. “No land that offers
more beauty and more promise to the sick of heart or the sick of body.
You have distilled the nectars of new wines to banish the rot and
disease the flesh is heir to. You have preserved the tradition and
knowledge of seventy years, saving it for the twenty-first century. You
are the mages and alchemists of the microscopic age, and now you join
the explorers of the West, with an immense treasure to share.”

Tamara translated in a loud whisper for the students and scientists who
crowded around the table.

“I am honored to be treated as a friend, and as a colleague. You have
shared with me this treasure, and the treasure of Sakartvelo—the
mountains, the hospitality, the history, and by no means last or least,
the wine.”

She lifted the horn with one hand, and said, “Gaumarjos phage!” She
pronounced it the Georgian way, phah-gay. “Gaumarjos Sakartvelos! “

Then she began to drink. She could not savor Lado’s earth-hidden,
soil-aged wine the way it deserved, and her eyes watered, but she did
not want to stop, either to show her weakness or to end this moment. She
swallowed gulp after gulp. Fire moved from her stomach into her arms and
legs, and drowsiness threatened to steal her away. But she kept her eyes
open and continued to the very bottom of the horn, then upended it, held
it out, and lifted it.

“To the kingdom of the small, and all the labors they do for us! All the
glories, the necessities, for which we must forgive the...the pain...”
Her tongue became stiff and her words stumbled. She leaned on the
folding table with one hand, and Tamara quietly and unobtrusively
brought down her own hand to keep the table from upsetting. “All the
things to which we...all we have inherited. To bacteria, our worthy
opponents, the little mothers of the world!”

Lado and Tamara led the cheers. Zamphyra helped Kaye descend, it seemed
from a great height, into her wooden folding chair.

“Wonderful, Kaye,” Zamphyra murmured into her ear. “You come back to
Tbilisi any time. You have a home, safe away from your own home.”

Kaye smiled and wiped her eyes, for in her sodden sentiment and relief
from the strain of the past days, she was weeping.

 

The next morning, Kaye felt somber and fuzzy, but experienced no other
ill effects from the farewell party. In the two hours before Lado took
her to the airport, she walked through the hallways in two of the three
laboratory buildings, now almost empty. The staff and most of the
graduate student assistants were attending a special meeting in Eliava
Hall to discuss the various offers made by American and British and
French companies. It was an important and heady moment for the
institute; in the next two months, they would probably make their
decisions on when and with whom to form alliances. But they could not
tell her now. The announcement would come later.

The institute still showed decades of neglect. In most of the labs, the
shiny, thick, white or pale green enamel had peeled to show cracked
plaster. Plumbing dated from the 1960s, at the latest; much of it was
from the twenties and thirties. The brilliant white plastic and
stainless steel of new equipment only made more obvious the Bakelite and
black enamel or the brass and wood of antique microscopes and other
instruments. There were two electron microscopes enshrined in one
building—great hulking brutes on massive vibration isolation platforms.

Saul had promised them three new top-of-the-line scanning tunneling
microscopes by the end of the year—if EcoBacter was chosen as one of
their partners. Aventis or Bristol-Myers Squibb could no doubt do better
than that.

Kaye walked between the lab benches, peering through the glass doors of
incubators at stacks of petri dishes within, their bottoms filled with a
film of agar swept and clouded by bacterial colonies, sometimes marked
by clear circular regions, called plaques, where phages had killed all
the bacteria. Day after day, year after year, the researchers in the
institute analyzed and cataloged naturally occurring bacteria and their
phages. For every strain of bacteria there was at least one and often
hundreds of specific phages, and as the bacteria mutated to throw off
these unwanted intruders, the phages mutated to match them, a
never-ending chase. The Eliava Institute kept one of the largest
libraries of phages in the world, and they could respond to bacterial
samples by producing phages within days.

On the wall over the new lab equipment, posters showed the bizarre
spaceshiplike geometric head and tail structures of the ubiquitous
T-even phages—T2, T4, and T6, so designated in the 1920s—hovering over
the comparatively huge surfaces of Escherichia coli bacteria. Old
photographs, old conceptions—that phages simply preyed upon bacteria,
hijacking their DNA merely to produce new phages. Many phages did in
fact do just that, keeping bacterial populations in check. Others, known
as lysogenic phages, became genetic stowaways, hiding within the
bacteria and inserting their genetic messages into the host DNA.
Retroviruses did something very similar in larger plants and animals.

Lysogenic phages suppressed their own expression and assembly and were
perpetuated within the bacterial DNA, carried down through the
generations. They would jump ship when their host showed clear signs of
stress, creating hundreds or even thousands of phage offspring per cell,
bursting from the host to escape.

Lysogenic phages were almost useless in phage therapy. They were far
more than mere predators. Often these viral invaders gave their hosts
resistance to other phages. Sometimes they carried genes from one cell
to the next, genes that could transform the cell. Lysogenic phages had
been known to take relatively harmless bacteria—benign strains of
Vibrio, for example—and transform them into virulent Vibrio cholerae.
Outbreaks of deadly strains of E. coli in beef had been attributed to
transfers of toxin-producing genes by phages. The institute worked hard
to identify and eliminate these phages from their preparations.

Kaye, however, was fascinated by them. She had spent much of her career
studying lysogenic phages in bacteria and retroviruses in apes and
humans. Hollowed-out retroviruses were commonly used in gene therapy and
genetic research as delivery systems for corrective genes, but Kaye’s
interest was less practical.

Many metazoans — nonbacterial life-forms — carried the dormant remains
of ancient retroviruses in their genes. As much as one third of the
human genome, our complete genetic record, was made up of these
so-called endogenous retroviruses.

She had written three papers about human endogenous retrovirus, or HERV,
suggesting they might contribute to novelty in the genome — and much
more. Saul agreed with her. “Everyone knows they carry little secrets,”
he had once told her, when they were courting. Their courtship had been
odd and lovely. Saul himself was odd and sometimes quite lovely and
kind; she just never knew when those times would be.

Kaye paused for a moment by a metal lab stool and rested her hand on its
Masonite seat. Saul had always been interested in the bigger picture;
she, on the other hand, had been content with smaller successes, tidier
chunks of knowledge. So much hunger had led to many disappointments. He
had quietly watched his younger wife achieve so much more. She knew it
hurt him. Not to have immense success, not to be a genius, was for Saul
a major failing.

Kaye lifted her head and inhaled the air: bleach, steam heat, a waft of
fresh paint and carpentry from the adjacent library. She liked this old
lab with its antiques and humility and decades-old story of hardship and
success. The days she had spent here, and on the mountain, had been
among the most pleasant of her recent life. Tamara and Zamphyra and Lado
had not only made her feel welcome, they had seemed to open up instantly
and generously to become family to a wandering foreign woman.

Saul might have a very big success here. A double success, perhaps. What
he needed to feel important and useful.

She turned and through the open doorway saw Tengiz, the stooped old lab
caretaker, talking to a short, plump young man in gray slacks and a
sweatshirt. They stood in the corridor between the lab and the library.
The young man looked at her and smiled. Tengiz smiled as well, nodded
vigorously, and pointed to Kaye. The man sauntered into the lab as if he
owned it.

“Are you Kaye Lang?” he asked in American English with a distinct
Southern drawl. He was shorter than her by several inches, about her age
or a little older, with a thin black beard and curly black hair. His
eyes, also black, were small and intelligent.

“Yes,” she said.

“Pleasure to meet you. My name is Christopher Dicken. I’m from the
Epidemic Intelligence Service of the National Center for Infectious
Diseases in Atlanta—another Georgia, a long way from here.”

Kaye smiled and shook his hand. “I didn’t know you were going to be
here,” she said. “What’s the NCID, the CDC—”

“You went out to a site near Gordi, two days ago,” Dicken interrupted her.

“They chased us away,” Kaye said.

“I know. I spoke with Colonel Beck yesterday.”

“Why would you be interested?”

“Could be for no good reason.” He thinned his lips and lifted his
eyebrows, then smiled again, shrugging this off. “Beck says the UN and
all Russian peacekeepers have pulled out of the area and returned to
Tbilisi, at the vigorous request of the parliament and President
Shevardnadze. Odd, don’t you think?”

“Embarrassing for business,” Kaye murmured. Tengiz listened from the
hall. She frowned at him, more in puzzlement than in warning. He
wandered away.

“Yeah,” Dicken said. “Old troubles. How old, would you say?”

“What—the grave?”

Dicken nodded.

