Beowulf's Children
by
Larry Niven, Jerry Pournelle, & Barnes


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

EARTH BORN

CADMANN WEYLAND: Onetime Colonel of UN Forces; Avalon Security Chief.
MARY ANN (EISENHOWER) WEYLAND: Botanist and Chief Wife of Cadmann Weyland.
SYLVIA (FAULKNER) WEYLAND: Biologist, Cadmann's Second Wife.

ZACK MOSKOWITZ: Governor of the Avalon Colony. 
RACHAEL MOSKOWITZ: Colony Psychologist and Zack's only wife.

CARLOS MARTINEZ: Remittance man. Historian, sculptor, and a hero of the Grendel Wars.

JOE SIKES: Engineer: Onetime lover to Mary Ann Eisenhower, and a hero of the Grendel Wars.

HENDRIK SILLS: Pilot. Hero of the Grendel Wars.

CHAKA MUBUTU ("BIG CHAKA"): Biologist.

CAROLYN MCANDREWS: Onetime Administrator and Agronomist. Heroine of the Grendel Wars.

JULIA CHANG HORTHA: Agronomist, nurse, and Minister of the Unitarian-Universalist Fellowship. 

STAR BORN

MICKEY WEYLAND: Mine Engineer and Forester; oldest son of Cadmann and Mary Ann Weyland. 
LINDA WEYLAND-SIKES: Daughter of Cadmann and Mary Ann Weyland, mother of Cadzie Weyland. Married to Joe Sikes.

RUTH MOSKOWITZ: Daughter of Zack and Rachel Moskowitz.

Grendel Scouts

JESSICA WEYLAND: First child of Cadmann and Mary Ann Weyland.
JUSTIN FAULKNER: Only surviving child of Sylvia Faulkner and her first husband. Adopted by Cadmann Weyland.

COLEEN MCANDREWS: Older daughter of Carolyn McAndrews.
KATYA MARTINEZ: Acknowledged child of Carlos Martinez.
EVAN CASTENADA: Skeeter pilot.
EDGAR SIKES: Computer specialist; son of Joe Sikes and Sikes's first wife.

Bottle Babies

AARON TRAGON: Unofficial leader of the Star Born. 
STU ELLINGTON: Mathematician, skeeter pilot. 
CHAKA MUBUTU ("LITTLE CHAKA"): Biologist; adopted son of Big Chaka. 
TRISH CHANCE: Bodybuilder.
DERIK CRISP: Hunter, Grendel Scout Supervisor. 
TOSHIRO TANAKA: Sensei to the Star Born; karate and yoga instructor. 

Grendel Biters

CAREY LOU DAVIDSON 
HEATHER MCKENNIE 
SHARON MCANDREWS

OTHERS

CASSANDRA: An artificial intelligence. 
OLD GRENDEL 
LONG MAMA: Not precisely an eel. 
TARZAN, ZWEIBACK, and others: Chamels. 
COLD ONE: A snow grendel. 
THE QUEEN: A lake grendel. 
ASIA: A Scribe.

==========================

Beowulf's Children
Prologue

CAMPFIRE

    "Once upon a long, long time ago, our parents and grandparents left a place called Earth. They traveled across the stars in a ship called Geographic to find paradise. But their paradise turned into a living hell . . . "
    The campfire jetted white flame as it reached a gum pocket in the horsemane log. The flame held for almost a minute, then died back to glowing coals. A cast-iron skillet balanced on firestones sizzled in the embers. A sudden gust momentarily sent sparks toward the misty night sky and the stars frozen overhead.
    A dozen wide-eyed youngsters were packed shoulder tight on makeshift seats of logs and stones, huddled expectantly in the dying firelight. They had waited all their lives for this night.
    Justin Faulkner's voice growled, caressed, leapt, burned hotter than the ebbing flames. "From the stars they came," he stage-whispered. "Seeking to build homes where no human had ever walked. Avalon was a land untamed, stretching beneath a sky strange to human eyes. A paradise for the taking. These men and women were the best, the smartest and the bravest Earth could offer, two hundred chosen from eight billion people. Our parents. They are the Earth Born. But they didn't know the truth about their new world, a truth that you--" His long sensitive fingers, sculptor's fingers, bunched and stabbed as if each and every child were guilty of unspeakable crimes. "--you Star Born, have never been told . . . until now. Until this week. Until tonight."
    Justin's voice carried the authority and infinite wisdom of all his nineteen years. None of the children was older than thirteen. Now they were youngsters, Grendel Biters. Tonight would be their first step toward becoming Grendel Scouts. At dawn they had left the human settlement called Avalon Town and hiked across the plain, along the Miskatonic River, then up Mucking Great Mountain along the minor tributary called the Amazon. Lunch and dinner were little more than stream water.
    Their curious and eager shining eyes were black and brown and blue and jade, carrying genetic gifts from every people of Earth. Their limber young bodies were as perfect as the night stars, their minds filled with dreams more incandescent still. These were the exhausted young inheritors of a world new to Man.
    " . . . the rivers were filled with a fish they called samlon. And they caught the fish, and ate the fish . . . " Justin slipped a knife from his belt sheath. He poked its point about in the smoking pan, skewing a morsel of sizzling meat. He held it up, worrying the ragged, black-burnt chunk of flesh with his teeth. Then he passed both pan and knife to his right, to a ten-year-old girl with blond, shoulder-length hair.
    She bit gingerly at first, then harder to tear a piece loose. The texture resembled tough beef, not at all like fish. She chewed--and the meat bit back. She clawed at her throat, gasping, but managed to pass both pan and knife to her right. A boy dark-skinned as the surrounding night made a choking sound, and whispered "Water . . . "
    Their eyes misted. Some struggled with wretched coughs, but no one moved. The pan circled the campfire until there was nothing left but smoking iron.
    "But one night the river which gave life to the colony, brought death. Even now, even here, high up on Mucking Great, if the wind is very quiet, on a night like tonight, you can hear old Misk calling . . . "
    Justin trailed off. With superbly theatrical timing, the wind dwindled to a murmur. There in the distance roared the mighty Miskatonic, rushing past the foot of Mucking Great . . . or was that only the Amazon?
    "The samlon developed legs, and teeth, and a taste for human blood. They became . . . grendels. They clawed their way from the river, gasped air, and found it good. They moved so fast that other animals looked like statues to them. They slaughtered everything they saw. Our parents fought back, but it was no use. The camp was lost. Cadmann Weyland led the survivors here to his stronghold on Mucking Great, where they made their last stand.
    "And there--" Justin's thin finger cast an unsteady shadow toward the irregular chunk of stone called Snailhead Rock. "That was where my father died, torn to pieces by the ravening horde. And there on the verandah is where Phyllis McAndrews was killed, still screaming reports to the orbiting crew of Geographic. And there . . . " Justin was lost in the story now, beginning to hyperventilate. " . . . others were caught, torn apart and devoured by frenzied grendels moving faster than eyes can see. Down there by the cliff edge--" The dark hid it. "--two men waited in a wrecked skeeter while grendels battered the walls in with their heads. And there was where Joe Sikes sent a river of fire flowing down, finally killing the grendels, saving every human life--"
    Pause. The wind had picked up. When it lulled there remained no sound save the rushing waters.
    "That was a long, long time ago. But sometimes on a night like tonight, if you press your ear to the ground, you can still hear the screams of the dying, as teeth tear their flesh open and devour their vitals. And you can thank the spirits of the dead that there is no longer anything to fear.
    "No more monsters, no more grendels . . . " Justin paused for effect. "But if there are spirits of men, who can say that there are not spirits of monsters as well?"
    His audience's young eyes were wide, and still. Their chests hardly moved as they struggled to keep control. The dogs were tethered well away from the campsite, and now, sensing the children's fear, they began to growl and strain at their leashes.
    "Some say that the spirits of the dead war nightly, up here on Mucking Great Mountain. Our dead parents and grandparents pit rifle and spear and knife against fang and claw and speed, night after bloody night. They don't want to--but they must. Because if they lose, just once . . . just once . . . "
    He narrowed his eyes fiercely. "The grendels will claw through the portal that separates life from death, and return to ravage Avalon again. And not just Avalon. They'll go across the stars as we crossed between stars, back to Earth . . . "
    A light dew of sweat dampened his forehead. His voice dropped to a hoarse whisper. "What was that? Was that a scream? It sounded almost like a scream, a human scream. The scream of a soul already dead, but dying yet again. A soul now cast into some deeper, more terrible pit. And is that another? And another . . . ?"
    The boys and girls strove to still their breathing and quiet their heartbeats, attempting to capture every word.
    "But if the ghosts of the humans are dying once again then--"
    There was a terrible shriek, and from beyond the ring of firelight lurched a woman soaked in blood. She staggered, one hand held piteously to her cheek. One eye was clotted with gore and the other was insanely wide, as if witness to all the terrors of hell.
    After her, in a blur, came something inhuman.
    Ten feet of hissing reptile bounded into the firelight: splay-clawed, barb-tailed, eyes dead to gentleness or love, merciless as glass.
    It smashed her to the ground, perched atop her and howled--!
    The children scrambled in all directions, screaming, crying--
    Then silence, save for the crackle of the fire. The girl's bloody body lay still upon the ground, grendel perched above, triumphant--
    And then she sat up, sputtering with mirth. "Justin Faulkner, you are an utter bastard!"
    "It's the company I keep, Jessie." He grinned like a shark. "All right, round 'em up!"
    The "grendel" sat up, and a stocky, muscular Japanese boy of about seventeen Earth years climbed out of its hollow belly. His face was darkened with charcoal, and he laughed so hard he could barely breathe. Jessica slapped him on the back. "You should make some little, tiny buildings, some miniature artillery, and do a giant monster movie, Toshiro." 
    "Godzilla versus a four-hundred-foot grendel?" He shrugged out of the grendel skin. "You know, if we hadn't had to rebuild Tokyo every six months, Japan would have ruled all of Earth."
    From all around them, just beyond the reach of the firelight, larger human figures returned, shepherding their younger siblings back to the firelight. 
    "Come on back!" they roared. "Sissies!" 
    Shy, embarrassed, the stragglers returned by ones and twos. They protested loudly but hid grins behind small heads, and wrung crocodile tears from laughing eyes.
    Tentatively, then with growing enthusiasm, they examined the hollow grendel carcass, its thick forelegs and wide jaws, its stubby spiked tail. They ran their small fingers along its scales, each imagining that it was his father, her grandmother who slew the dragon.
    Justin took his place at the center by the fire, and this time spoke in a normal voice. "All right, it was a joke. Not a pointless one. We want you scared. Grendels are dangerous. The Earth Born killed all the grendels here on this island. As children you've been safe here all your lives. Now it's time to learn about your world, all of it, not just this island. We are the Star Born. This world is ours.
    "You've seen a dead grendel. Now you're growing up, and pretty soon you'll go to the mainland and see live grendels. And more. It's time to learn what happened to those two hundred. Earth's best and brightest, each of those Earth Born chosen from among more people than there are stars in these skies.
    "Up to now you've lived by Earth Born rules. Now it's time for you to learn why they make rules, and why we live by them.
    "Time to go to the mainland, time to learn why the Earth Born act so strange, and--it's time to learn what eats grendels. Now, off to sleep."
    The children reluctantly headed toward sleeping bags and bedrolls. A few of the candidates tried to ask questions, but the Grendel Scouts wouldn't answer. "Bedtime. You'll learn, but not tonight." 
    "Why not tonight?" 
    "You'll learn it all. Now scoot!" 
    "Can Rascal sleep in my bed tonight?" 
    "Sure, your dog can sleep with you."
    The children tumbled off to bed, pleasantly tired, utterly ready for sleep.
    Jessica winced as Justin wiped the slaughterhouse blood from her face. "Yerch. Tomato juice would have been just as good." 
    "Such a thought offends my creative soul." 
    "I did like the wasabi in the beef heart, Toshiro. Nice little touch. You didn't do that last year."
    "Musashi said to 'pay attention even to little things.' " Toshiro stretched until his back crackled, and poked his bare feet close to the embers.
    "I thought it went well," Jessica said. "Just the right balance. Justin, you brought Sharon McAndrews. She's not twelve yet."
    "She's bright, she's curious, and she's been asking questions about her mother," Justin said. "We have to tell her." 
    "Zack isn't going to like it." 
    "Freeze 'im."
    "We have agreed to the rules," Toshiro said. "We don't interfere until the Grendel Biters are twelve--" 
    "Wouldn't work," Justin said. "Either we tell Sharon now, or in a year she'll tease the whole damn story out of Cassandra, and then she'll tell the rest of the Grendel Biters. No preparation, just bang!, they know. This isn't the last time this is going to come up, either. Sharon won't be the only one to ask the right questions." He grinned. "And what's Zack going to do to me?"
    "The Earth Born aren't always wrong," Toshiro said. His forefinger traced the scar on Jessica's neck. It was years old, almost faded, and most of it was hidden under her hair; but it trailed down her neck to her left shoulder. She snatched his hand, and kept it.
    "I'd be more interested in what Dad thinks," Jessica said. "How does Coleen feel about this?"
    "She thinks she can't go on fooling her little sister much longer," Justin said. "And I agree. You know their mother."
    Toshiro nodded gravely. "Oh, well. Here, I brought some real food."
    They moved closer to the fire to roast chunks of turkey breast over the dying coals, and they sat talking of and laughing over small or important things: the season's fish yield; skiing on the southern peaks; a review of the previous week's hysterical debate between Aaron Tragon and Hendrick Sills. (Postulated: Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations was actually a misinterpreted satirical essay.) Modifications in the huge dirigible, Robor. The odds on next month's surf-off. The conversation went on for hours, until the laughter finally died down, and yawning took its place.
    They were the Star Born. Their electronic servants could bring them all of Mankind's knowledge: history, science, drama, the great literature of a dozen cultures, and a hundred soap operas; but they lived in a primitive paradise, utterly safe, inoculated against every disease. There was more than enough to eat, meaningful work to do, and few dangers. They were a strong, clean-limbed clan. Their parents had been chosen after tests that made the old astronaut selection procedures look like child's play. Physically perfect and bright-eyed, they radiated the kind of relaxed familiarity that only those raised in an insular community can ever really know.
    There were a few minutes of intense quiet, during which eyes met across the ember light, and nods preceded gentle touches of offer and acceptance. Two at a time they linked arms and drifted off into the shadows.
    And then at last there were only four left: Jessica, Justin, Toshiro, and a young redhead named Gloria.
    "Success?" Jessica yawned, a question that was not a question.
    "Success," Justin agreed. Another round of chuckles. 
    "Now it's time for the chicken run," Jessica said. 
    Toshiro yawned. "Ruth still wants to try it." 
    Justin and Jessica locked gazes, and both laughed simultaneously. "Ruth?" Justin said incredulously. Then both said at the same time, in the same little-girl singsong: "But what will Daddy say?"
    They broke up again, the laughter subsiding to hiccups. " 'Pon my word," Justin said finally. "Zack ruined that child."
    "She's asked to become a Grendel Scout," Gloria said. "And asking why we won't let her in."
    The others shook their heads in unison. "No mainland for Camelot's eldest virgin," Jessica agreed. "Not until she breaks the leash."
    Justin stirred lazily. "You have to admit she's a hell of a chamel trainer, though."
    She nodded. "Chamels are fun. Justin, the Earth Born used to explore! I remember when they brought the first chamels back from the mainland."
    "And lost Josef Smeds to a grendel catching them," Toshiro said carefully.
    "Yes, but--" Her eyes were locked on the northern horizon. "I won't say it was worth that, but you can't explore without risks. And every trip teaches us more. Teaches me more about myself." 
    "I just wish . . . "
    "I know," she said quietly. Jessica intertwined fingers with Toshiro, and gave his hand a squeeze. She affected a huge yawn. "I think . . . that it's time to turn in." 
    They rose, and retreated from the firelight. From out in the darkness there came a gasp, followed by a prolonged and girlish giggle.
    Justin watched her go, and then, belatedly, became aware of the weight of a feminine head on his shoulder. "Behind us," Gloria said. "Geographic, just rising."
    He turned; Gloria turned with him. Geographic was a silver line with a dot at one end. No details showed, but it looked huge, just above the line of the ocean.
    Twenty-four years ago . . . God. "Ten times the mass, back when it went into orbit. Interstellar brakes! I wish we had photos. Can you imagine how bright that drive flame must have been?"
    "No humans to see it from down here. Maybe it blinded a few grendels." Gloria was almost behind him, her hands toying with his hair. "Is that really your wish?" 
    To see it myself! "I wish . . . that tonight was Fantasy Night," he lied.
    "It's any night you want," she whispered. She reached up, turned his face with her fingertips, and kissed him blisteringly.
    His hands found the warm, soft places on her body, and they sank down together by the firelight. There was no fumbling; latches and straps unbuckled as if by magic.
    If anyone saw them there, no one commented. There were no gawkers as their bodies, gilded by the light of embers and twin moons, entwined for almost an hour before release finally calmed them both.
    They cuddled for a time, whispering, then, suddenly freezing, scrambled for a thermal sleeping bag.
    Then there was silence, save for the distant sound of water, and the call of some far-off night creature. No one heard. The fire consumed its last morsels of fuel, and began to fade. No one saw.
    The only eyes that remained open were grendel eyes. Open, staring, glass eyes. 
    Dead eyes.
    Eyes that saw everything, and felt nothing at all.

Twenty-four years before . . .

    It should have been dead of night. Her body knew that, even though the whole world glared silver-blue in the light overhead. The grendel had tried looking near it, and had been blind for most of a day. Blind with the agony in her head, eyes that saw only at the edges; blind long enough to die, but the lake monster hadn't killed her.
    Since then she had not looked up, though she would wonder about that spear of fire in the sky for the rest of her life.
    For a long, long time there had been nothing but the hideous pain in her head. Now the agony in her head was receding. Now she could remember that she was hungry. Feeble with hunger. How could she feed herself if she was too feeble to fight?
    And how was it that she had never had such a notion until now? She had never fought the lake monster, but hunger would never have stopped her. Only fear.

    At the southern end of a vast lake, where the water emptied out into a sluggish muddy river, there the grendel had lived as a swimmer. There she had first drawn breath, and killed a sibling for food. She began to remember, now, how hungry she had always been. She and her sibs had fought for room to swim and room to run, for space to hold their own swimmers, and had eaten what they killed, until only three or four remained. She remembered the sister who had challenged the monster of the lake, and died almost before the grendel could turn to see.
    The lake monster lurked along the west side of the lake, where pebbly mudflat gave way to horsemane trees. Farther south the forest was different, a tangled mass of vines and hives and trees that grew like puzzles and snares. The lake monster lurked sometimes in the horsemanes, but never in the tangle forest. And south of the tangle forest was where the grendel and her sisters lived, and a myriad of their spawn.
    Her sisters died, and there were only the grendel and her own spawn. And still it was not enough. She'd grown too large. Eating her own spawn felt wrong, repulsive, and that wasn't the worst of it. She and they didn't have the room. If they tried to spread out, the lake monster took them. No room to feed, not enough moss and insects for the spawn, meant that they never grew large enough to feed their mother. She had to move.

    Here the muddy river flowed into the lake. By the silver-blue light of a thing in the sky that fit no pattern at all, she looked south. The patterns linking in her mind now showed her how strange it was that she had ever come here alive. She hadn't had the sight, then. Wherever she looked, then, was only fear, no patterns at all.
    She'd seen how fast the lake monster was in the water.
    And on land . . . but not the southwest shore. Something so peculiar had happened there that the images remained even now . . .
    It had only been a little time since the change, for her and for the sister she must drive away. Her sister, beaten, had retreated to land. She had crossed that patch of pebbly mud and into the tangled forest beyond. No web of plants could stop the juggernaut that was a grendel. Her sister might find new turf.
    The grendel watched her from the southern shore. Food was scarce, and there was the lake monster too.
    Her sister was in the tangled trees, and into some kind of dust or mist. She screamed once, and burst out of the trees in a spray of wood and vines. Even the lake monster had never moved that fast. The grendel watched her streak down the pebbly mudflat at the head of a dust-cloud comet.
    The lake monster lifted her terrible head--and let her pass.
    She was nearly out of sight when she tumbled to a stop. She seemed little more than a heap of bones. The grendel had never dared go for a closer look.
    And beyond that place was the lake monster's favorite lurk.
    No, the west shore was impossible even to the senseless being that the grendel had once been. The route around the east shore was twice as far, twice the distance in which the lake monster could find her . . .
    She must have had just a trace of pattern-making ability, even then.
    She had waited for a hard rain, then gone wide around the east shore. Prey was fast and wary. On speed it could be caught. When the rain stopped she must enter the lake to shed the heat, and out of the water before the lake monster could come-- 
    And so she had lived until she reached the river inlet.
    The river was what she sought. She had arrived starving, but bottom feeders had fed her for many days. Then came a sickness in her guts, that moved into her head and inflated. For days she had known nothing but the pain in her head.
    And now she felt cold and weird, and her bones were stretching her skin taut, and her mind was making patterns.
    Way down there in silver-blue light: her own patch of water and land, with too little food for herself or her spawn. Probably the lake monster had already cleaned them out. Only one thing had been desirable about that place. There she could taste the lake monster in the water, and gain some sense of where she was.
    Closer: the lake to her left, and on her right the pebbly mud, and the tangled wood where her sister had turned to fog at a speed-enhanced run.
    Closer yet: more pebbly mud and horsemanes behind, and one huge old horsemane very near the water. The lake monster spent most of her time in the water offshore, but when the woods were wet they could shield her too. Grendel spawn could turn to grendels anywhere in the lake, and their surprise could be brief and intense when the lake monster burst from the trees.
    Here: she could see muddy river and know the food beneath. The river would bring bottom feeders. She could eat now . . . and the lake monster would taste her anywhere in the lake, and know she was here. If she had seen patterns then, she would not have come here. 
    But she saw another pattern now.
    The grendel bore her hunger. She watched the woods and the water. Of prey she saw no sign, and no sign of the lake monster. The silver spear of light failed to rise, but the strangeness of her world did not go away. 
    And so a day passed, and a night.
    At midmorning of the following day, the grendel began to walk toward one great horsemane isolated on the mud. 
    No sign of the lake monster.
    At a moment that was nothing but guesswork, the grendel began to run.
    This was the first puzzle she had ever solved, and she had no faith in it at all. She ran, but she was not on speed. When a wave moved where no wave should be, terror and vindication surged and then she was on speed. She was skating on slick mud, her legs a blur, homing on the one isolated tree in a plume of mud and gravel.
    The lake monster came out of the water, screamed challenge, and was on speed.
    The grendel veered right and dug in. She'd pass the tree on the right. If the lake monster came straight at her, hit her broadside, she would be torn, smashed, dead. She could see, feel her own death in the pattern! But a notch more speed changed that, pulled her ahead, and now the lake monster would hit the tree.
    The lake monster saw it. Veered left. She'd strike the grendel after she passed the tree.
    Hah! The grendel veered left. She missed the tree by a toenail's width, just behind the lake monster's spiked tail. The lake monster was turning in a spew of gravel and dust, but falling behind for all that.
    It slowed her for only a moment. She had been eating while sickness melted the flesh from her daughter.
    There was dust blowing out of the tangle forest as the grendel swept past them, burning inside, her enemy far too close behind her. But the lake monster swept through the dust, and the dust followed her like a comet tail.
    Enough! The grendel veered out over the water. She could run on water if she ran fast enough, but the speed was broiling her from inside. She looked back once, and saw what she had hoped for. She ducked, and smashed into the water, and sank, cooling.
    She lifted her snorkel. Then, cautiously, her eyes.
    The lake monster was a comet of dust running straight at her across the water.
    If the lake monster dived now she'd be free of the fog and the heat within, but the grendel would have her. The lake monster didn't dive. Probably she never thought of it. When she stopped, she was invisible in a restless dark cloud.
    The cloud drifted away. Red bones sank through water. The grendel gnawed at them, and was still hungry. Hungry and triumphant. Now she would hunt the shoreline where the lake monster no longer ruled.

PART 1

ICE ON THEIR MINDS

Youth holds no society with grief.
-EURIPIDES


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 1

THE RETURN

The optimist proclaims that we live in the best of all possible worlds; and the pessimist fears this is true.
-JAMES BRANCH CABELL, The Silver Stallion

    "What in the hell is that?"
    Jessica Weyland heard the words without recognizing the voice. It originated just outside the stone walls of the Hold's guest bathroom, where she was scrubbing her cheeks with ice-cold water piped from the Amazon Creek.
    The bath was part of the Hold's guest suite, attached to a guest bedroom that had been hers before she built her own place at Surf's Up. Toshiro Tanaka, her previous evening's entertainment, still sprawled unconscious across the bed. Sleep-cycle incompatibility prevented them from having anything but an occasional fling. Too bad. Like many a musician, he had such good hands . . . 
    "Frozen bat turds! Will you look at it?"
    Jessica ran toward the living room before thinking about what she'd heard. Her long, deeply tanned and muscular legs ate the distance between bedrooms and living room in their nine long strides. Her mind flew faster than her feet. Kids paying us back for last night? Gotcha? No. They'd be pretending horror, not astonished curiosity. No, this is something else.
    Jessica was tall and blue-eyed, as Nordic as a glacier, with shoulder-length blond hair, high cheekbones, and a large, cool mouth. She moved like the athletic animal she was. The muscles in her calves bounced with every long stride. She was unself-consciously naked: there had been no time to grab a towel.
    Her father, Cadmann Weyland, Colonel Cadmann Weyland, had built the Hold as a fortress against monsters even before he understood the grendel threat. The others called him paranoid and worse, even accusing him of faking a threat as part of a power grab, even a military takeover of the colony. He left them then, and built his home on a high ledge, digging into the side of Mucking Great Mountain. Most of it was underground: cool in Avalon's winters, and warm in her summers. Light slanted in through the Hold's louvered ceiling. The living room was Paradise.
    A green-tiled channel grooved the middle of the living room. The glacial Amazon ran through that, right through the living room, a foot deep and four feet wide. It had once been deeper and narrower there, but Jessica didn't remember that. It was another of those facts she had been told, and which she believed in the same way that she believed there was a solar system with a yellower star and a planet named Earth.
    A gently sloped tile shelf ran along part of the stream. The rest was fenced off by a hedge that grew along the edge of the running water. The hedge was composed of plants from both Camelot Island and the far reaches of Avalon, so that the room was as much aborted and botanical garden as living space.
    Fully half those weirdly shaped plants had thorns and spines. They weren't really cactus, but resembled cactus more than they did any other kind of Terran plant. Avalon plant life needed protection. Any defenseless life form was instant grendel chow. Some plants had other protection: the violet-petaled beauties with acid resin, tiny deep blue fruiting bulbs with astonishingly active poison, carnivorous lilies that could turn a frog-sized creature to a husk in forty-eight hours. The garden grew more lethal over the years as the children of Cadmann Weyland's Hold grew more able to cope with them. The plants came from everywhere--Camelot Island's highlands, offshore islands, even the mainland, all brought here to line the stream--and despite the garden's lethality it was beautiful.
    From her earliest days Jessica thought the Hold was the most wonderful place in the world. At present Cadmann, Mary Ann, and Sylvia were in the southern thorn forests hunting specimens. The Hold and Cadmann's Bluff itself were Jessica's and Justin's for the next day and a half. A safe place despite the garden. A perfect place to begin the initiation of the Grendel Scouts. Later they would be taken to the mainland for their real coming-of-age. There were neither serpents nor scorpions in this paradise. 
    So who was doing all the yelling?
    She was opening the front door when she saw it behind her. Something emerged from the downstream edge of the Amazon's emerald streambed. It wriggled under the lip of the living room's southern, downhill wall to come right into the Arboretum. Something alive. Something thick-bodied and powerful. Its head reminded her a little of a horse's, only stubbier. It pushed its way farther in. The head melded into a broad, powerful neck that grew longer, and longer . . .
    A voice behind her said: "Hot damn! It's an eel!" Toshiro knelt by the side of the Amazon to watch as the beast worked its rubbery length against the current. It splashed cold water on Jessica's bare feet as it moved past. It ignored them completely. Eventually the entire creature emerged into the living room, fully sixteen feet long, and as thick as a horse's upper leg.
    The front door slammed open, and two panting children ran in. One of them was a small dark girl, Sharon McAndrews. She brandished a sharpened stick. Her mouth and eyes were wide as she watched the eel wiggle sinuously toward the living room's upstream opening. The other, a fourteen-year-old redheaded, freckled lad named Carey Lou Davidson, gawked at Jessica's chest before reluctantly returning his attention to the eel.
    "Stay back," Jessica said quickly. She turned to Toshiro. "Hey, keep an eye on that thing, and watch the kids. I'm throwing on some clothes." 
    "But what is it?" Carey Lou asked.
    Toshiro laughed. "I think that Mrs. Eel is just trying to get upstream."
    "Spawning grounds?" Jessica asked.
    He nodded. "Remember Chaka's biology lecture last month? The ecology is returning to Camelot now that the grendels are gone. This will be part of it. Hot damn!" 
    He was hopping on one leg, pulling his pants on, risking intimate injury in his enthusiasm. Jessica was already halfway to the guest bedroom.
    She struck the room like a blonde whirlwind, sucking up shirt, pants, and thong sandals without a moment's pause. She was back in the living room before the eel disappeared uphill through the northern wall.
    There was a change in the location of the general hooting outside. Jessica exited, pulling on her blouse, neglecting the buttons but knotting the corners together into a makeshift bra. She almost collided with Justin.
    "What do you see?" Jessica was already running.
    "It's heading right up the hill. Did Dad leave any of the holocam stuff?" 
    "Ice on my mind! I didn't check."
    Justin took off up the hill. She swiftly overtook a mob of shrieking Grendel Biters. "Stay away from it!" she shouted.
    "It won't hurt us," Sharon McAndrews said. "It can't, it's too slow."
    "You never saw anything on speed," Jessica said. 
    "No legs," one of the children shouted.
    "Yes, all right, but stay away from it anyway, we don't want to scare it." She'd seen the videos of samlon growing legs to become grendels, but that took hours, it couldn't happen in a minute. Still--"Stay away from it." 
    With an ear-numbing burr, Skeeter VI buzzed up over the edge of the bluff. Jessica turned and shaded her eyes to look into the windscreen. Evan Castaneda, clean-cut, classic Latin features, was at the helm of the silver-blue autogyro. Coleen McAndrews, fifteen but looking much older, sat in the passenger seat, holocam clipped to her right shoulder.
    Jessica waved Evan down. The skeeter dipped and buzzed, as if intoxicated by flight.
    She hopped onto the runner at the skeeter's side, twined the seat belt around her wrist, clipped a safety line to her belt, and gave a thumbs-up.
    With gut wrenching speed Skeeter VI rose two hundred feet above the house and hovered. From this perspective, Cadmann Weyland's ranch was a miracle of human effort. Rows of soybeans and corn and alfalfa checkered the bluff, and pens for pigs and goats and the small, furry Avalon native marsupials called "Joeys."
    Beneath them, the Amazon sparkled in a silvered ribbon, just catching the morning sun. Alongside it raced a stream of children who laughed and urged one another to greater effort. Justin was well in the lead.
    "Can you see it?" Evan yelled above the turbine whine.
    The sunlight glinted off the stream. She thought she caught a slender shadow, but . . . 
    "Not yet."
    "Try these." Coleen handed her a comm-link optical set: binoculars with cameras linked to the colony's central computer system. "Cassandra. I'm turning the war specs over to Jessica." 
    "Ready, Jessica," the computer responded.
    She slipped on the war specs--they looked and felt like heavy sunglasses--and was rewarded by an enhanced version of Cassandra's camera-eye perspective. She adjusted it so the right lens was transparent, and the left gave her the comm-link image.
    She squinted her right eye.
    Yesss . . .there be the dragon. Shimmering in the fluorescent reds and blues of the thermal enhancement, the eel struggled its way upstream. "Cassandra, display best size data." 
    Length: 647 cm.
    Estimated weight: 27 kg.
    Cassandra gave them a glowing wiggling eel track.
    Jessica whispered "Enlarge." The eel stopped, then wiggled forward and back. It expanded to fill her field of vision. 
    "Who sounded the alarm?"
    "Little Chaka or his old man," Coleen said. "One of the Mubutus picked up the river alert. Nothing this big, not ever."
    Not for the twenty years we've been here, and not for--She thought about the implications. When humans arrived, the island of Camelot had an incredibly simple ecology, samlon and green slime in the rivers, Joeys and pterodons in the high mountains, and a few thorny or poisonous plants scattered about the plains. Grendels had eaten everything else. But how long had it been that way? "You know what this means? The grendels didn't own this island for thousands of years. They couldn't, the eels wouldn't keep coming back--" 
    "Sure about that?" 
    "No, but it's something to think about. Don't lose it!" 
    "I'll give you another," Coleen said. "What triggered the return after all these years?" 
    "Now, that is one interesting question."
    The tumbled granite majesty of Mucking Great Mountain rose up to greet them. The peaks were constantly swathed in fog. A few irritated pterodons swooped out of their nests to investigate Skeeter VI. Humans didn't hunt pterodons. Over the two decades that humanity had infested Avalon, the great leathery creatures had lost all fear, and now considered the skeeters worthy only of derision. The autogyros were fast but clumsy, barely capable of beating a pterodon on the straightaway, and zero competition at aerobatics.
    The eel continued to labor upstream. It humped painfully through the shallows, fighting as urgently as any Earth salmon ever did. 
    Salmon. 
    Samlon.
    Jessica repressed a shudder.
    This thing was almost certainly a carnivore--but would confine its hunting to water. It might be as dangerous as a moray eel, fully capable of taking a baseball-sized lump out of an unwary buttock, but it shouldn't be able to do anything else. It couldn't come out of the water.
    Still . . . "If it had speed it would have used it by now," Jessica dictated. "Cassandra, database search, match that image."
    "No exact match. One similar life-form, two hundred ninety centimeters in length, observed in a stream on Black Ship Island." A map flashed momentarily in her vision: Black Ship Island was a smaller uninhabited island off the mainland coast.
    "Evidence of speed?" she asked.
    "None," Cassandra replied. "No visible speed sacs, no structures evolved for cooling. Probability low to nil." 
    "Thank you." 
    "You're welcome."
    Every skeeter carried a fully armed shock rifle, one of the tools developed in case the grendels ever came back. They never had, but everyone was trained to use the weapons anyway. Shock rifles could deliver numerous designer loads: chiefly a capacitor dart to stun, and an engineered biotoxin which triggered overload of its "speed" sacks. Speed was the superoxygenated hemoglobin that allowed the grendels to accelerate to over 110 km/hr in about three seconds. The toxin drove a grendel completely berserk, drunken on her own "adrenaline." A speed-drunken grendel produced enough heat to cook itself in about seventy seconds. 
    Evan tapped his ear. "Roger." 
    "What's the word?" Coleen shouted.
    "Kill it. Standing Municipal Order One-four-two. On file. Kill it first, decide whether it's harmful later." 
    "It's got no legs," Jessica said. "It can barely function on the land. Cassandra says it doesn't use speed. Let's wait." 
    "Got my orders," Evan said ruefully.
    "Is Skeeter Six still set up for dolphin transport?" 
    "Sure--we flew Quanda and Hipshot up yesterday." 
    "Great. Somebody was playing with a Ouija board." 
    The eel struggled up and up, blindly urgent, making surprisingly good time. Justin had kept up with it, although many of the children had dropped back by now. She patched herself through to Justin's comm link. 
    "Jessie here. What does it look like to you?" 
    "Ugly thing. Ignoring us, though. What's the word?" 
    "Kill it." 
    "What do you think?" 
    "Let's take it alive." 
    "I like the way you think. Zack's got ice on his mind." 
    There was a crackle of static and another voice came online. It was Zack Moskowitz, governor of Avalon. "I find that tasteless, young man. You listen to me, both of you--your father has standing orders--" 
    "Our father isn't here, Zack." 
    "I want you to kill that thing. We don't know--" 
    "That's right, we don't. I'll kill it when I'm ready." 
    "Dammit, Jessica!"
    She thumped her headset. "Brzztfplt. Gee, Zack, you're breaking up! Over." And switched her comm link off as Evan was bringing the skeeter around for a landing next to a large pond.
    The skeeter thumped down on rocks. Jessica snatched up the rifle, and hopped off.
    The eel humped itself over a rock break, looked at her without seeing her, and wiggled into the center of the pond.
    Coleen moved a little closer, her holocamera recording the entire event. Every time the eel moved, a staccato series of computer-enhanced afterimages, flashed before Jessica's left eye. Cassandra's exobiology study program was having a field day.
    "Get in closer, Coleen," she said.
    The eel swished back and forth through the pond's crystal-clear water. Jessica clambered up a rock to get a better view.
    Beside her, Coleen whispered, "Cassandra: M-D Coleen EELTALK," opening a personal file, and began to speak.
    "Eel-like. Probably carnivore. Five meters long. Estimate top speed of twenty knots. This is no infant. Cross-hatching indicates healed scars. Minimum of a year old, probably more like ten years, possibly a lot more than that. This is a mature animal seeking a spawning ground."
    Justin was the second up over the rocks. The children and others of the teens were behind him. It had been an uphill jog, and despite his superb physical condition he was blowing hard.
    Coleen nodded acknowledgment, and kept talking. "We can bet that it didn't spawn here. We haven't seen anything like this. Probably genetic memory. Likes the taste of the water."
    "That water's glacial. It won't have much taste," Justin said.
    "This is great," Evan said. "The first. The first returning land animal--oceanic?"
    "Aside from a couple of the bird-thingies," Coleen said, "you're right."
    The eel began to move in diminishing circles, as if claiming the pond for its own. Then it was still. The children gathered around the edge. An expectant hush settled over them.
    Jessica anticipated Justin's first request, and handed her comm card to him before the words left his mouth. He sighed with pleasure.
    This was something new, something that would occupy conversation for weeks--no mean contribution to their lives. For this alone, she owed the eel a chance to live.

    The First would have to allow more frequent visits to the mainland. Have to!
    After all--the local ecology was returning. Evidence of it was everywhere. There were three times the flora to be categorized now. The wind carried puffballs and tiny fairy-brollies and fertilized seeds, and the Earth-native crops of Avalon were experiencing their first real competition. Weeds were a universal fact of life.
    Two dozen children ringed the pool. The eel was still, then rippled, then was still again. Justin adjusted his face gear, zooming in on the minor miracle.
    Something was happening, but Jessica had to get down on her knees and elbows to see it. A jellied mass began to emerge from a gland two-thirds of the way back along the eel's dorsal surface. It squirted out like whipped cream, milky with reddish dots within.
    Egg sac. Thousands upon thousands of little eels. Jessica's earphone was sizzling. Zack. "Jessica? Why haven't you killed it yet?"
    "Sacrilege," she said distantly. "The miracle of childbirth. It's an ovary thing--you wouldn't understand." 
    "You don't know what the hell that creature is." 
    "Oh, and you do, right, Zack?"
    The squirting seemed to have stopped. Once again, the pool was still.
    Jessica selected a load for the shock rifle. "Thirty kilos, close enough," she said softly, and turned the dial on the capacitor dart. A green light blinked on the rifle dart; the batteries in the stock held sufficient charge. Reluctantly she thumbed the arming switch.
    Justin's long face was peaceful. "Now?" 
    "Not yet. Let's see if it's supposed to die here." 
    He nodded. The eel was almost, motionless, merely shuddering. The rippling became regular, as if it were straining at some mighty task. Its black wet muscularity swelled and released.
    Then, about one-quarter up from the tail, a puff of black appeared.
    "Semen?" Jessica whispered. "Bifertile hermaphroditic?" 
    "Why extrasomatic?" Evan asked.
    "Think about it," Justin said quietly. "In the old days, this pool might have just boiled with eels. They release their egg sacs. Then they release their semen. The semen spreads through the pond, perhaps preferentially fertilizing other egg clusters. Instant exogenesis." 
    Coleen whistled. "Wrong. I think it's blood." 
    "Blood?"
    The eel had begun to shed its tail. A chunk of meat was separated from the main mass of the body, and blood was more plentiful now.
    "All that blood in the water," Justin said. "Best evidence I've seen that grendels weren't native to this island." 
    Coleen ran to the skeeter, unloaded a roll of absorbent rubber sheeting, and lugged it back to the pond. She took off her shoes and socks and rolled up her pants. "I'd bet minerals in the blood are a clue to Mommy's home territory, her mating ground." 
    "Mating ground?" Justin asked.
    "I say she's not hermaphroditic. Mated before she came up here. Stored up the semen, dumped it here." 
    "Bet."
    The tail had worked its way almost completely loose now, clouding the water with blood. Only a few scraps of tissue held the tail on. They watched as those fibers tore away.
    The eel swam in a lazy circle, shedding its former torpor.
    "Doesn't look moribund to me," Justin said.
    It seemed to notice them for the first time. It dove, wiggling fiercely beneath the surface of the water, and left the pond.
    "Time," Jessica whispered, and put a capacitor dart just behind its head. It spasmed once, and then again, and sank.
    "Move it!" Justin was already clambering into the water. "We don't want this thing to drown!"
    Coleen McAndrews was right after him. "It humped its way over rocks--we saw it out of the water for more than thirty seconds. I think we can make it." The tarp was around the eel in a moment. The children started to plunge in with them. Jessica waved them back. "Watch out for the egg sac!" she yelled. "Stay ashore."
    They rolled it out of the pond. Its skin was surprisingly spongy, and oozed water. It was the work of a moment to attach the eel and its roll of protective sheeting to one of the dolphin slings beneath Skeeter VI. Jessica clambered aboard.
    "We'll get another skeeter up here," she yelled above the growing whine of the turbines. "Get us an egg sample and meet me at Aquatics."
    "There in ten minutes," Justin promised. She whooped and raised her hand, and he slapped it hard. Their eyes shone.
    "Got one, dammit," Jessica said.
    Ten seconds later Skeeter VI was up in the air, and plunging toward Avalon Town.


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 2

MOTHER EEL

How cheerfully he seems to grin 
How neatly spreads his claws 
And welcomes little fishes in 
With gently smiling jaws!
-LEWIS CARROLL, Alice in Wonderland

    The skeeter soared. Evan's sure hands took it up so rapidly it seemed the world deflated beneath them. The acceleration was a little much for Jessica, but then, that was Evan. Damned if she'd let him know he'd upset her. She grabbed the horizontal hand bar set above the instrument panel, and hoped he wouldn't notice her white knuckles.
    She patched through to Biomed, down at Avalon town. "Chaka. Got something for you. Get Hipshot and Quanda out of pen number three soonest." 
    "Is that the eel that everyone's talking about?" 
    "Betcha."
    "I expected something like this. We're draining the salt water out of the tank, and flooding it with the Miskatonic. " 
    "I want to have your child. Can we have full diagnostics in five minutes?" 
    "We aim to please."
    The skeeter dove, nearing free fall as it plunged toward the camp. The arc of Avalon Town, twice its original size, spread out below them. All of its corrals and lodgings, shops and quilted fields screamed up at them at gut-wrenching speed.
    And there, near the Biomed dome, were the three saltwater tanks. Luckily, there were no sick animals at the moment, but Dr. Mubutu had flown Quanda and Hipshot in from the Surf's Up lagoon, giving them some privacy in hopes that they might breed. Someone tall and black--it had to be Little Chaka--was below them at the pens, but she didn't really have time to think. Evan was whooping as he dove in, thoroughly enjoying her no doubt pasty-faced reaction to his aerobatics.
    Just wait, Evan, she swore silently. I'll get you for this.

    The saltwater tanks were raised five feet above the ground and sunk six feet beneath it. The pen was drained, and the Miskatonic was pumping in at the rate of three hundred liters a minute. Skeeter VI came to a hovering halt, its tail rotors foaming the water.
    Little Chaka waited on the white-tiled lip of the tanks. Jessica untied the cargo line. The roll of foaming sheeting loosened, and twelve feet of eel splashed into the shallow water. She jumped down to stand beside Chaka and waved the skeeter away.
    The eel lay at the bottom of the tank, barely covered as the water level slowly climbed. "I think it's just stunned," Little Chaka yelled. He knelt next to the pen to examine the dark eel. "Looks to be moving water through the gills. Let's add a little oxygen." He whispered to his comm card. There were more bubbles from the air inputs at the bottom of the tank. "That ought to take care of her."
    Little Chaka Mubutu was almost six and a half feet tall, dark-skinned but with the narrow features more often found in whites. He looked quite unlike his adopted father. Dr. Mubutu--Big Chaka. Together they were the colony's premier biologists. Dr. Mubutu was still at home, at the marine research facility west of Surf's Up.
    "Nothing else to do," he said. "We don't know enough to help." 
    "I hope she lives," Jessica said.
    "So do I. She looks tough. Leave it to Mother Nature. I'm going in. Coming?"
    "Let me get my kit." Skeeter VI buzzed down to a hexagonal concrete landing pad next to Biomed. Jessica grabbed her belt pouch as it shut down. The still turning rotors fluttered her hair in all directions, but she didn't notice. She hurried into the building.
    Little Chaka had the holos up and running by the time she entered Aquatics. The station's west wall disappeared as the cameras and tank sensors displayed data from the churning, foaming tank. Chaka sat in an oversized swivel chair, the keyboard on his lap. He waved toward a more normal sized chair. "What do we have here?" Chaka asked. 
    "You should know better than me." 
    "File name?" 
    "Mother Eel."
    "Cassandra?" Chaka said softly. "Let's see what we know about Mother Eel."
    "Integrating files. Done. Records now available," the computer's cool, familiar voice answered. Chaka's version of Cassandra's neutral voice had been given a lyrical New Guinea lilt.
    The holo divided into two images. One remained with the eel, and the other replayed the skeeter's-eye view of its heroic spawning odyssey.
    "What do we have . . . ?" Chaka whispered. He watched the tail drop off, and chuckled.
    "What happened there?" Jessica asked.
    "The Amazon is glacier water, poor in minerals. Mama Eel is making sure her babies have food." 
    "Cannibals?"
    "No, this is a salmon trick, Jessica. The salmon of Earth swam upstream and died. Mama here only leaves her tail, but it's the same trick. Tail will rot. Parasites in the tail will multiply drastically as tissue decomposes. Insects come to dine. Water boils with insects and worms and such. Hatchlings have their dinner, won't they, Mama?"
    Outside, the clouded sky cleared for a moment, and Tau Ceti glared through the Aquatics building's domed ceiling, dimming the holos. The ceiling polarized, and the holos brightened.
    Slowly, the eel began to twitch again.
    "Let's get a closer look," Little Chaka murmured.
    The eel ballooned up before them. Its skin disappeared as Cassandra obligingly bounced ultrasound through the water, and then adjusted the scans. "Ah ha--" 
    The door burst open, and Zack Moskowitz stormed in.
    Avalon's chairman was about fifty-five Earth years old, thirty-eight Avalon, and a slightly heavier gravity hadn't been kind to him. His shoulders stooped, and his face was deeply lined. The mustache and eyebrows that gave him an unfortunate resemblance to Groucho Marx were thinner now, speckled with white. Care and woe, stress and responsibility had bent him as if physical burdens.
    "Jessica!" he roared. "I gave you a direct order to kill that thing." 
    "Why?" she asked mildly. "And by the way: hi, Zack." 
    "Standing Order Municipal Rule One-four-two. 'Until adjudged otherwise, all new species are to be considered hostile.' This is the first time something this large has returned to the island. It has pronounced amphibious tendencies." 
    "So does my niece, but that doesn't make her a grendel." 
    "Look at this." Chaka slid into a swivel chair, lacing his thick dark fingers behind his head. The eel's head became orca-sized, revealing a mouthful of tiny, even, sharp-looking teeth. "Mama eats small fish. She might take a chomp out of your leg if you tromped on her. Sorry to disillusion you, Zack, but you wouldn't be her idea of lunch." 
    Zack grunted, then turned back to Jessica. "I don't care," he said. "An order is an order."
    "I know," Jessica said, her voice still extremely even. "Rules are rules, because we can't trust individual judgment. You can't trust your individual judgment." And I was never frozen. I don't have ice on my mind. "Zack, my father wrote most of the Standing Orders, remember?" 
    "You're taking advantage," Zack said. "Cadmann will be back tomorrow."
    Jessica leaned forward. "What makes you think that I care? The Grendel Scouts are controlled by Second Generation. Biomed is controlled by Second Generation. This is for Star Born, not Earth Born." 
    "At the moment."
    "The eel was spotted by--" 
    "--sensors created and monitored by adults. First Generation. We set up the alert and sent out the skeeter. You commandeered it, and directly countermanded my order--" 
    Jessica's blue eyes narrowed hotly. "Cadmann's Bluff is not incorporated into the township of Avalon Town, never has been, never will be, and you damned well know why. The eel was captured there. My father is incommunicado. Justin and I are in command of the Bluff until he returns. I made my decision based upon my authority on the Bluff and my control of the Grendel Scouts. Chaka?" 
    Chaka spun in his swivel chair. "Mother Eel is secure, Zack. We can put a net over the tank, if you want." 
    "You know damned well that isn't the issue. The issue is that you exceeded your authority. I am responsible for the security of this colony--"
    Jessica's smile was hard, but her voice remained even and untempered. "And although I had no hand in giving you that authority, I have abided by the decision. Until now. But I think we can learn more about Avalon from a live creature--and we have eggs coming down the mountain--" 
    "Eggs?" Zack was furious. "I want them destroyed--" 
    "You are the civilian authority, and as such have control of ordinary emergencies. But this isn't one of them, it's no emergency at all. It is the normal functioning of the planet, Zack. The ecology is returning. The signs have been there for eight years. Plants. Fairy-brollies, and look what they grew into! No birds, but we have new fish, new insects--Zack, this is important, this is the way this island used to be. This is for a joint council. Earth Born and Star Born--" 
    "Adults and Second Generation," Zack said absently.
    "All right, but this is for the joint council. First and Second Generations, together. Or the biology board. But it's not something for rules, or a panicked, autocratic decision." 
    "But--" 
    "Our world, Zack," Jessica said. "Ours, not just yours." 
    "It was my impression, Zack, that this was a republic--not a principality." Chaka's tone was mocking, but gentle. "And it is our world too."
    Zack closed his eyes for a moment, and finally nodded. : "Right, right. You're right. All right. I want a cover on the tank. As soon as your father links in, I want him informed. And we'll have a special meeting when he gets back." Zack placed a fatherly hand on her arm. She let it remain there.
    "You don't remember, you can't." Zack said it with a kind of resignation, and she knew two things: first, she was about to get a dose of Grendel Angst, and second, this was as close to an apology as Zack could come.
    "Things have been peaceful for a long time. We want them to stay that way." 
    It's for your own good, children.
    He patted her, then took another long, hard look at the eel. It was beginning to swish to and fro around the tank. As if seeking a way out. "Put a cover on that tank." Zack shook his head, and left the room.
    "Ice on his mind," Chaka said. "You know what Ruth said?" 
    "What?"
    "She said Zack sleeps in his own room. Wakes Rachael up in the middle of the night, screaming."
    "Hell, I think that half of the First have nightmares. Freezing Grendel Wars." Jessica shook her head. "Dead and gone, man, dead and gone. Just like the grendels." 
    "Gone here," Chaka said. "Plenty of them over there. We'll have to deal with them someday."
    "Or our kids will," Jessica said. "We won't have to settle the mainland for generations."
    "Yes we will," Chaka said. "I'd better get the cover on that tank." 
    "Do you want one?" 
    Chaka shrugged. "It will be inconvenient." 
    "Freeze it, then. Don't bother."
    Chaka looked at her. Before he could say anything they were interrupted by the whir of an approaching skeeter. "That should be baby bro, with the egg samples," Jessica said.
    "Right. Cassandra," Chaka said briskly. "I want a lifecycle simulation." 
    "Where do you think this thing lives?" 
    "The Deeps north of Surf's Up, maybe." 
    Justin slammed the door open. A jar half-filled with murky water sloshed in his hands. Within floated a sample of the jellied egg sac. "Merry Christmas," he said cheerily. "Are we set up?"
    "All but." Chaka took the jar carefully. He drew a few drops of cloudy fluid and placed them into an analyzer. Cassandra worked. Presently a stream of filtered, designer water began to splash into a small tank on the workbench. When it was filled, Chaka emptied the jar into the tank.
    Jessica sat down next to Justin, winked at him. "Caught hell from Zack about our slippery friend."
    Chaka was big, the strongest of the Star Born, but you didn't notice that when he was at work. "We'll just dissect one of the eggs so Cassandra can have a look. There. Window, please." A flood of biological and mathematical symbols reeled past them in a small holographic window, a peek into Cassandra's mind. She was comparing the eel with other Avalonian life forms, including the dreaded grendel. And she was scanning the eggs down to their DNA. And although it was understood to be no more than thirty percent accurate, Cassandra would devise a best-guess life cycle for the beast, including preferred foods at varied points in its development.
    Before their eyes the eel transformed: Now its holographic image was covered with skin, now it was a network of muscles, now it was a mere skeleton whipping eerily through the water. Now it was a jelly sac crowded with internal organs, and in the next second it was merely a nervous system, each branching node outlined in blue.
    Jessica lit a cigarette. It was machine-rolled but unfiltered. The tobacco field covered less than ten acres of the twelve thousand acres of cultivated land surrounding Camelot. There had been discussion as to whether the seeds should be grown at all. Most of the Earth Born didn't smoke and hated tobacco. Some were astonished to find there were tobacco seeds aboard Geographic. The same debate had preceded the hemp planting.
    Mankind's vices had accompanied him to the stars. Alcohol, nicotine, and marijuana existed on Avalon; likewise poppy fields and coca plants. The mountain ridges had been seeded with coffee. Pharmaceutical cocaine and morphine were too valuable medicinally. Hemp too hardy and useful a plant fiber. Tobacco . . . well, tobacco was tobacco.
    Jessica allowed herself a cigarette or two a day. You'd have to quadruple that level of consumption to find clinical deterioration of lung tissue, and it had been a century since anyone died of cancer anyway. As for the other drugs . . . well, they were a part of Man's history.
    "Terrible habit," Justin said. She nodded, and shook him out a butt.
    The pumps made small, moist rhythmic sounds, swishing murky water about in the egg tank.
    Chaka was totally absorbed: the rest of the world might as well have disappeared. Jessica said, "Listen, we'll check back with you, all right?"
    Ruth Moskowitz waited right outside the door for them, a bemused look on her round and pleasant face. She was five foot seven of clean-featured brunette. Attractive, but not pretty. Rounded, but not chubby. Competent, but not particularly bright as far as anyone could tell. Ruth was on the edge of everything, and not remarkable for anything but being Zack's daughter. She stripped off her work gloves. "It's beautiful," she said.
    "What's beautiful?" Justin asked. 
    "The eel! Tell me about it."
    "Not much to tell," Jessica said. "It swam up the Amazon this morning, you know, right through the living room--Oh. The Amazon is a stream."
    "I've been to your house," Ruth said. "It must have been going to the pools above the Keep." 
    "Yes, that's right."
    "What would it want?" Ruth mused, "There's nothing up there, just glacier." 
    "Right again. Got to the headwaters and laid eggs." 
    "Ooh. Wish I'd been there," Ruth said. "It's safe, then?" 
    "Looks harmless enough. Chaka is looking into it." 
    "I bet Daddy had a tizzy," Ruth said. "Municipal Standing Order 142." She looked puzzled. "He must have ordered you to kill it, but I can see it's still alive." 
    "That's right," Jessica said.
    "Wish I'd been here," Ruth said again. Her comm card chirped. She lifted it, listened a moment, and said, "Yes, sir. I'll ask him." She smiled uncertainly at Jessica. "Got to ask Chaka something--" 
    "Right. See you."
    Ruth went into the Biomed building. Justin and Jessica looked at each other and grinned. "Wish I'd been here," Justin said, his voice mocking Ruth's.
    "You're unkind," Jessica said, but she laughed. It was easy to laugh at Ruth.
    "You're the one who forgot she'd been to the Keep. She was there more than once, actually."
    "Years ago," Jessica said. "Look, you decided she couldn't be a Grendel Scout--"
    "We all did. You know she'd go straight to Zack if she learned what we do." Justin climbed the ladder to the top of pen number two, and sloshed his hand in the water until Hipshot, the small dark male of the dolphin pair, approached and rubbed against it. He stroked the dolphin carefully. "What do you think, boy? Think you'll give Quanda a tumble?"
    Jessica sat next to him. They looked down on Avalon Town.
    The main colony boasted almost three hundred separate dwellings now, and another went up every month or so.
    A hundred and thirty-seven of the original two hundred remained alive. Most of them lived here, in the expanded grounds of the original encampment. A few had imitated Colonel Cadmann Weyland and built permanent dwellings elsewhere on the island. More had hunting lodges and second homes near the snows. The fishing colony at Surf's Up was the unofficial domain of the Star Born, not quite a separate city, not quite permanent, a perpetual summer camp linked to the main colony by skeeters. If the comm cards were the nervous system of the colony, the skeeter autogyros, built on Earth and assembled on Avalon, were its blood vessels. There were never enough skeeters. Building more would require fuel cells, and fuel cells required palladium and platinum for catalysts; those required mines and prospecting, which required access to the mainland, but the skeeters didn't have enough range for routine operations to the mainland, and there wasn't any facility there to recharge their fuel cells anyway. But if we had a power station and more fuel cells that could be charging over there. . .
    Everything we want to do requires two other things, Jessica thought. And as the First grew older, more and more of the colony's resources went into consumption, things the First Generation wanted, no, needed, leaving less for investment in the future.
    I guess we're rich, she thought, recalling Cassandra's images of poverty on Earth. Earth people would call this Paradise. And the First won't last forever. She suppressed that thought as quickly as it came. It seemed ghoulish. We have the skeeters, and we have the comm cards. We all have Cassandra and all the libraries of Old Earth, everything people learned before the First left it behind and brought us here. We 're still one community, if you close one eye and squint a little.
    One community, but several places to live now. Jessica preferred the original settlement--the nerve center. Surf's Up was lovely and vibrant, with a slight Japanese feel to it, the domain of the Second Generation. The mountain settlement (thirty-five up there now!) was wonderful, with good siding most of the year. In five years there would be hunting--the vegetation was established. Some of the trees were twenty years old, a new forest like nothing ever seen on the planet before. Deer and moose and bear were being released slowly into the fields and meadows. Some would survive; some would thrive. There was general agreement that when the herds were well established they should thaw out some of the frozen wolf embryos and release a pack. Exactly when was argued vigorously, and so far "not yet" won out. That wasn't a question that cut deep between the generations. Not yet. The generation wars were about other things.
    There were 280 Second Generation "children," an average of four for every woman who survived the Grendel Wars.
    Truly, Jessica thought cynically, an heroic achievement. And of the hundred and fifty female "children," almost half had already had children of their own, an additional seventy progeny, for a total of 480 inhabitants either immigrated or born here on the fourth planet of the star called Tau Ceti. And for all we know, we 're the whole universe. I guess that's what really eats at Zack. Dad, too. Where is Earth in all this? She never calls, she never writes . . .
    The sounds and smells of life here were utterly routine now. Cattle grazed, dogs roamed the streets in packs--and not an ill-fed animal in the lot. Half-naked children played in alien dust ten light-years removed from their closest non-Avalonian relations. 
    Life went on.
    The smells and sounds and sights of Camelot weren't very different from those captured in holovids of Earth. Their sun was a little brighter. From what her father said, shadows were sharper and bluer.
    But the voracious grendels had so stripped the island that Man found it easy to conquer. Earthworms had defeated the local annelids for mastery of the soil. Earth crickets chirped at night. Crows had been seen to attack lower-level pterodon nests, destroying eggs in a battle for territory.
    After the Grendel Wars, the Firsts had helped their imported organisms along. You could still get arguments among both Earth Born and Star Born on whether they'd given them too much help in competing with native life, but it was hard to blame those who favored the familiar Earth organisms over Avalon's. "Samlon," the grendel's larval stage, had seemed so harmless, until they changed . . . who knew what might next grow fangs and claws? So an orgy of slaughter had ensued. The creatures of Earth completely dominated Camelot, this small island corner of Avalon.
    Justin stood and stretched lazily. "I'm going to see Carlos. Staying here?"
    "Sure." She slipped off her sandals and pants. She wore bright blue underpants, which contrasted beautifully with her long, muscular tanned legs. With barely a splash, she slipped into the tank with Quanda and Hipshot, who immediately glided over to investigate. Jessica dove under, then came up and spit out a mouthful of water. "Should only take an hour or so to get the preliminary reports. Inquiring minds want to know."
    "You've been reading those tabloids again."
    "The twentieth century's highest cultural achievement Seems they spent all their time hunting something called Bigfoot, or triangulating Elvis sightings." 
    "Who?" 
    "Mid-twentieth-century pop singer. Died of fame." 
    "So should we all." 
    "On this backwater? Not likely."
    Jessica vanished back beneath the surface. Quanda came up beneath her. Jessica firmly grabbed a fin, and let Quanda take her for a ride around the tank.


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 3

ICE ON THEIR MINDS

All happy families resemble each other, each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.
-LEO TOLSTOY, Anna Karenina

    Justin chuckled as he headed toward Avalon Town's main street. Jess amused him. Saving the eel was just like her. Had she done it only to antagonize Zack? She usually had several reasons for anything she did.
    He swiveled aside to let a stream of half-naked boys and girls playing some spontaneously generated variant of tag scamper past. They giggled and sang, tripped, rolled ignoring their bruised shins and shoulders, and ran out into the fields. The game might progress until midnight, when exhaustion, not security, dictated an end to play. The grendels were dead. The only things that could harm a human child were the dogs, and they wouldn't. Children had never been safer, nor held more precious.
    The streets of Camelot were broad and well paved, with private gardens where vegetables and fruits were nurtured into bloom. Intimate hothouses and hobby sheds were tucked along every byway.
    Justin's favorite garden was behind Carolyn McAndrews's place. In neat, furrowed rows she cultivated roses, carnations, tulips, and daisies. Within the plastic-sheet walls of her hothouse lived Avalon's greatest-and only-orchid collection. Human shapes moved inside the hothouse: Carolyn herself, followed closely by a small brood of children. She had seven in all, three fast after the Wars, and another four in more leisurely fashion. The latest was barely out of diapers. The oldest two had children of their own. Coleen, the youngest of the first group, still lived at home, but lately she spent most of her time studying. Coleen wanted to go back to the stars.
    She'll outgrow that, Justin thought. He had. It wasn't possible, not now, not in Coleen's lifetime. There was just too much to do with this world before they could rebuild and refuel Geographic-and beyond that was the problem no one could solve. Slower-than-light travel meant decades between stars. Stay awake and die of boredom, or go into frozen sleep and risk hibernation instability, ice on my mind. He shuddered.
    He saw motion through the plastic, and hurried past. Carolyn McAndrews was coming out of the greenhouse. He was out of sight before she emerged.
    Carolyn had been like an aunt to him until he was twelve or so. He had sensed her withdrawal without understanding it. She did well with children, couldn't cope with adults. She was damaged, and knew it. Hibernation instability if you were polite, ice crystals in the brain if you were accurate, ice on your mind if you were rude, it was all the same thing and it affected all of them. Justin remembered the shock when he'd found it out. He'd been searching through the computer for something else, and found closed files, and-
    His parents, Zack, the adults, all damaged, all unwilling to trust their own judgment. How to survive? Think in advance, use collective wisdom. Make rules; talk them through; change them endlessly. In a crisis, follow them blindly.
    It wasn't hereditary. Carolyn was right when she said "But I make good babies . . ." Carolyn and her sister Phyllis-her late sister Phyllis, killed in the final minutes of the Grendel Wars-had gone into cold sleep as a pair of Earth's best and brightest, and wakened with their emotional stability shattered. Others had come out judgment-impaired or simply stupid.
    But we don't have ice crystals in our brains, Justin thought. We don't have to make rules and obey them blindly. He'd been shocked when he first realized that. Now they taught it to the Grendel Scouts when they were old enough. The big secret: the adults have ice on their minds.

    Every turn through the warren was comfortable to him . . . in some odd way, too comfortable. Everything on the island was safe, and sometimes it chafed.
    In a world of fewer than five hundred people, every detail, every sight, every face becomes tediously familiar, comes entirely too readily to mind. He'd seen the next house uncounted thousands of times. It slid in and out of his mind so effortlessly that it felt like an extension of his own flesh.
    The house frame was the same prefabricated rod structure employed by most of the First. Over the years, its exterior had been modified with simulated stone sculpted to imitate rock blasted and hauled from a distant quarry. Some of it was rock blasted and hauled from a distant quarry . . . 
    The porch was broad. There was a swinging bench with a striped awning to protect it from the sun. Justin vaulted the fence one-handed, calling "Tio Carlos!" There was no answer by the time he reached the top of the stairs. He poked his head in, and looked around. 
    He smelled coffee.
    This was every bit as much his home as Cadmann's Bluff. He used to spend two or three nights a week here. He was seventeen, eleven Avalon, by the time he moved to Surf's Up. These well-worn stones and boards still smelled like home. At Cadmann's Bluff the smell of coffee was rare; but this house always smelled of coffee.
    The taste had shocked Justin the eight-year-old. Jessica and others of the Star Born had acquired the taste, but Justin never had. Coffee was bitter. Still, he loved the smell.
    The house was crammed with bric-a-brac carved from stone and thornwood and seashells. Weird sculptures of grendel bone were shelved under a broad window above a row of complex topological puzzles molded of composition plastic. There were hypercubes one disassembled to convert into Klein bottles, and Gordian knots only Cassandra could untie. Every inch of the walls was covered with handcrafted delights. Most of the incredible creative output was the product of one mind, the mind of Carlos Martinez.
    On the way out to the workshop, he passed Carlos's bedroom. The bed was wide and spacious and rarely lonely. Justin's "Uncle" Carlos had married only once: he'd gone "down the rapids" with Bobbie Kanagawa. The marriage was six hours of bliss, bloodily annulled by a grendel attack.
    Holotape of that awful event was required viewing. The attack patterns had been analyzed endlessly. They'd all heard the lecture, too often.
    Carlos had married only once and became a widower the same day, but he had half a dozen acknowledged children. Some lived with him, some with their mothers. He was rumored to have more. You could never be sure who had been in that bed. His gametes get a huge return on investment for making him . . .
    The burr of a high-intensity drill grew louder, more jarring as he approached the high-domed workshop behind the house.
    The path between house and workshop was crowded with sculpture. Naked goddesses cavorted with satyrs rendered in volcanic stone. Impressionistic cloud cities carved in some kind of webbed driftwood. The eruption of Vesuvius whittled from an enormous bone flown back from the mainland, years before.
    Carlos was an accomplished wood sculptor before he left Earth for Avalon. Over the years he'd gained skills in metalwork, glassblowing, and odd, "found" art. He was, beyond question, Camelot's premier graphic artist. There was probably no single home on Avalon that didn't have a plaque, lamp, sculpture, or doorplate signed with his rakish scrawl.
    Katya Martinez opened the workshop door before he could get to it. Her faceplate and baggy coveralls disguised flaming red hair and a flawless body. She was a month younger than Justin's nineteen adjusted Earth years-or about twelve Avalonian cycles. Athletic, which made her attractive in ways that Trish, who lifted weights, never would be.
    Katya's mother had died early enough that Justin had no memory of her, but he'd heard her talk about it. Three of the First had died of strokes in the space of four days, and one had been Carlotta Nolan's current love. Ice on their minds: damaged arteries in their brains held for a few years, then tore open. Carlotta had fallen dead during the triple funeral, and that made four.
    Katya had grown up in this house, with no female role model or too many of them depending on who you asked, but she had never been in any doubt as to what sex she was. For years Justin thought of her as another sister, like Jessica. Then one day that had changed very quickly-
    A flame-jet flared to silhouette two welders in coveralls in the workshop behind her. "Katya. How's the anniversary piece coming along?"
    She flipped up her faceplate, and gave him a radiant, brown-eyed, broad-mouthed smile. It had been months since Katya and Justin had played games. "Fantastic. Dad's welding Madagascar into place just now."
    "Let me get into safety gear. I'm down for a couple hours-thought I'd say hi."
    Katya nodded enthusiastically and slipped past him. Justin pulled on heavy woven cotton overalls, and belted them in the front. By the time he finished, Katya was back to hand him a pod of beer. They watched each other while they drank. "I thought that you were taking the Grendel Scouts out for an overnight." 
    "Were, yes. Didn't you hear the alarm?"
    "Alarm?" She brushed a crimson strand of hair out of her face, and sipped deeply. "Nope. What's up?" 
    "Big eel. Came right up the Miskatonic and the Amazon, right through the Hold. We captured it. It looks pretty harmless, but it's the first grendel-sized carnivore we've seen on the island, and it's bound to get some attention . . . "
    "Over at Aquatics?"
    "Yeah." He tossed the empty pod into the trash. Two points.
    "Keep me posted."
    She held the door open for him. He was very aware that her fingers brushed his thigh as he passed her.
    Four shadowy figures crouched around an eight-foot curved metal bas-relief of the African continent. The huge silhouette would soon be attached to the Earth globe under construction just north of Camelot's main gates. A series of overhead winches kept Madagascar in place while one man waved semaphore to the others.
    Plasma torches spit as the piece fitted into place. Metal ran in glowing rivulets, and the air sang with the smell of scorched iron. Justin finished pulling his gloves on, and hurried to help.
    "Hola, Carlos!"
    "Hola, Justin. Que tal? Como estas?" Carlos glanced away from the model for just a moment. Almost instantly, there was a high, annoying whir. "Un momentito-" 
    The winch was malfunctioning, and the three-foot chunk of Madagascar-which weighed over a hundred kilos-sagged.
    Carlos and Justin put their silver heat-blocking gloves against the lower edge, where the metal still smoked, and lifted. The heat pulsed hungrily at their fingers, but didn't burn.
    "At the top! At the top!"
    Assistants screwed two large C-clamps into place, and Madagascar was realigned.
    Torches sizzled. Carlos turned his face away from the intense light.
    He stripped off his gloves. The major work finished, his assistants buzzed about, welding here and there, cooling with jets of water, then beginning to buff.
    He held a broad, muscular hand to Justin. "Wasn't expecting you until day after tomorrow. Australia is next." 
    "I'll be back."
    Carlos stepped away from the globe, leaving it to the younger artists. The African continent brushed his ceiling. On the wall opposite were blueprints for Australia. 
    "Have you got the basic mold finished?"
    "No," he sighed. "That's what I want you for. Two days' work, maybe. Then he can cast it. Then . . ." He shrugged. "Almost finished. It's been a year. In another month, maybe, it's done."
    Justin slapped his mentor's shoulder. Carlos was Latino, with predominantly African genetics. Even with his hair streaked gray, he was still disgustingly handsome. Carlos Martinez was Cadmann Weyland's best friend. About fifty-five Earth years, thirty-five Avalon, and in decent condition, but Justin knew that when Carlos cast an eye at the Seconds, especially the younger women, he felt his years.
    There was a certain sadness in Carlos's face. Perhaps being so close to the completion of a dream? Sometimes that did it . . . 
    "Cual es su problema, Tio?"
    Carlos chuckled. "For years I wanted to build this. You know, the north road is going to be a crossroads one day. Gateway to a metropolis. We have Surf's Up, and the mountain colony . . . Explosive growth soon now, as more of the Second have their children. And in fifteen years, whew." 
    "Terrific, huh? And how many of those bambinos will be yours?"
    His smile was calculatedly mysterious. "Six that I'm sure of. Not everyone wants to gene scan, so who knows?" 
    "Cassandra," Justin said. 
    "But she will not tell."
    Justin chuckled. "A little of that New Guinea flavor here."
    Carlos waved a hand at the young men and women laboring in his shop. "These are my children, though. Not just Katya, but like you. Learning sculpture. Learning history. The ones who care." 
    "The others will come around." 
    "Hope so. Now what can Uncle Carlos do for you?" Justin explained about the eel. "Zack will want to kill it as fast as possible. Destroy the eggs."
    "Knee-jerk reflex. I'll deal with him. Your father will want it studied." Carlos thought for a moment. "Might want those eggs destroyed, though. No telling what they'll hatch into." 
    "Eels."
    "Samlon become grendels. We don't have any examples of harmful larval stage and harmless adult, but-" 
    "I see the point, but I don't agree. And that's the point. We think there's going to be a row over this at the council meeting, and I wanted to take a little straw vote, find out where we'd stand." 
    "What's the problem?"
    "The problem is that it's our eel. It's our island, really-we're going to inherit it. And we can't just kill everything that comes up the river or flies in from the mainland. Eventually, we have to know how we fit in with this planet, or we'll be stuck here on this island forever."
    "You could stay here for ten generations, easy," Carlos observed. "Plenty of land."
    "We don't want to." 
    "Some of you don't want to."
    "Some means damned near all," Justin said. "Starting with me."
    Carlos studied him. "I don't blame you," he said at last. "Listen-I think that your father will side with you-he believes that strength is safety. And knowledge is strength." 
    "Are you suggesting that Zack would like to hide his head in the sand?" 
    "Can you entirely blame him?"
    An arc of sparks jetted out, turning the floor into a summer night's sky. The stars died.
    "We almost lost, amigo," Carlos said quietly, watching Madagascar. "We make a lot of noise about how heroic it all was. But listen between the lines." His eyes were deadly calm. "We almost lost." 
    "I know that it was 'tough-"
    "No," Carlos said. "I didn't say that it was 'tough.' I didn't say 'it was a struggle.' I said that we almost lost. All of us. Wiped out. If it hadn't been for a fluke of grendel behavior-that you can drive them crazy with the smell of their own speed-they would have slaughtered every living thing on this island."
    Carlos sat at the edge of one of the benches, and picked up a thermos, uncapping it to take a sip. He scanned the pieces of Earth strewn about his studio. There in one corner was India, mother to Man's civilizations. Suspended from the ceiling was Africa, possibly mother to Man himself. Already in place north of the colony was Europe, which had birthed the scientific method, and the Americas, creators of the technologies that had finally taken man to the stars.
    In that moment Carlos seemed old, deeply fatigued; but a light flickered behind his eyes that was almost ecstatic.
    "To our home, "Carlos said, and took a long sip. The hair at his temples was almost white, and the skin on his forearms was loose over the wiry muscle. "I'll never see Earth again, muchacho. Earth is an abstraction to you. A place the old folks talk about. Pictures we show you, tapes we play. Dead voices of dead people. But it was our home." 
    "We haven't heard from Earth in twenty years!" Justin said, instantly ashamed of the mockery that had crept into his voice.
    "Not a thing," Carlos agreed soberly. "And that means something different to every one of us. But back during the Grendel Wars, all that mattered was that we couldn't go home, and we couldn't win. We were all going to die, and there would be no one to bury our bones. We wanted to die here, to be a part of the soil-" He laughed coarsely. "But not as grendel shit. Anyway-at the meeting tonight, please understand why we are the way we are. If we are too protective of you, it's because you are all we have." 
    Justin nodded. "All right, amigo-but just remember-you can't keep making our decisions for us. And the more afraid you are, the more you had better let us grow up." 
    "I do remember being your age, Justin. So cocky. So . . . invulnerable. That was before Bobbie died, and there was nothing I could do to save her." He tilted his head to stare at the floor. "And you know? There was a moment there where I tasted my own death so clearly, when it was so . . . real, that I would have given up anything." He paused. "Even Bobbie. For another few moments of life." 
    Carlos took another drink. Justin caught the odor of fermentation from the thermos. "You never see yourself the same way again, amigo. You never quite get it back." 
    He grinned crookedly, mocking the pain in his own voice. "You're all we have left, Justin," he murmured. "And just maybe all that there is." As if aware that he had almost crossed some invisible line, he stood. "Back to work," he said brusquely.
    Justin hiked a thumb at the globe. "Looking good," he tossed over his shoulder on his way to the door. He let it slam behind him.

    The first comm shack had been a frail thing, tin and wood, but that was before the Grendel Wars. Now the colony's communications and computers were housed in a fortress, stone and concrete walls, massive doors, small windows. Above each door was a small room filled with boulders and rubble poised to fall on any potential invader.
    The Merry Pranksters had once filled one of those chambers with wet cotton. They'd watched through videocameras as Joe and Edgar Sikes walked into the trap. The momentary shock and horror, then the laughter, man and boy waist deep in wet cotton, throwing gobs of it at each other . . . but Zack and the other Earth Born hadn't been amused. The repercussions hadn't died out for months, and now entrance to Comm Control was monitored by TV cameras and recorded by Cassandra, and you couldn't get in unless the duty watch people let you.
    The communications building controlled all contact with the Orion spacecraft Geographic still in orbit above, the branch settlements around the island, and the automated mining apparatus on the mainland. The main communications board was also the colony's defense center, manned constantly as a human backup for the main computer defense systems. None of that had been needed for twenty years.
    Rules, Justin thought as he buzzed the interior. They set up their rules. Fine for them, but now we have to take turns standing watch with the First. It wasn't hard duty, and privately Justin appreciated the enforced reading and study time that Comm Watch provided, but it was another point of contention between Star Born and Earth Born.
    Edgar Sikes opened the door.
    "Ho. Edgar, I need a favor. I have to talk to my dad." 
    Edgar didn't seem surprised. "No can do. Cadmann's down south, and that's as much of an address as he left us." 
    Edgar was eighteen, pudgy, and brighter than hell. A childhood back injury had kept him from early participation in sports, and he had the reputation of being more interested in computers than people, someone worth knowing if you needed information, but never the first to be invited to parties. He was slightly younger than Justin. They had never been particularly close, but now Edgar's father Joe was married to Justin's stepsister Linda. Justin wasn't sure what relationship that created between him and Edgar. Close enough that he could ask Edgar for a favor. "Let's talk about it." 
    Edgar shrugged and stood aside. 
    "Greetings, Justin-san."
    It wasn't surprising to find Toshiro Tanaka in the Comm Center. Toshiro didn't sleep, at least not until nearly dawn and then not for long. He took advantage of that: other Star Born could get Toshiro to cover their shift at the center. Toshiro was going to sit alone and read or play computer games all night anyway, and by taking someone's shift he built up obligations. Like Carlos, Toshiro never wanted for coffee or tea.
    "Greetings, Toshiro-san." Justin suppressed a grin. He wasn't completely sure how to take this new kick Toshiro was on. Toshiro was always polite, always smiled, but Justin had read about the manners of the Tokagawa culture Toshiro seemed to be fascinated with. They always smiled, even when they were about to chop your liver out. "You've told them about the eel, then? Joe, he told you?" 
    "A little," Joe said. "You saw it too. Tell us." 
    Joe was sprawled in a massive sculpture, a chair and footstool Carlos had carved from the hard, dense, twisted grain of a horsemane root system. Carlos had installed it for his own watch. Butts and boots and elbows had polished and scarred it, but Justin believed it would last as long as Avalon.
    Joe Sikes was graying, slope-shouldered and a little paunchy despite his best intentions. He was one of the three heroes of the Grendel Wars, holding a place just below Carlos and not far below Cadmann Weyland himself. Justin's generation believed as an article of faith that all First had ice on their minds, but it wasn't easy to see what disability that gave Joe Sikes. The self-doubts characteristic of the First bothered him less than anyone except Cadmann. Sikes always seemed to be working on something. He was strong on industrial development, which included maintaining and establishing the mines on the mainland, and Justin had always found him easy to talk to.
    That changed, sort of, when it became clear that Sikes and Linda were much more than casually involved. Justin had never been able to justify his feeling of resentment, other than feeling that Joe was too damn old for her. And he was First, the damaged generation.
    "Five meters of fun," Justin said. "Zack just about had kittens. 'Kill it! Kill it! You have your orders, you know the rules, kill it!' "
    "Glad you didn't," Edgar said. He tapped computer keys, and the image of Big Mama Eel rippled across the computer screen. "Looks harmless enough. Maybe we'll learn something."
    Joe Sikes grunted agreement. "Yeah, but we still got problems from the mainland. Give Zack too much to think about, we'll overload the system."
    "No possible relationship," Edgar said. He jerked a thumb at the screen where the eel swam steadily around and around in the tank. "No way that's going to explode." 
    Say what? Justin said, "Explode?"
    "Well, I agree again," Joe said. "But Zack may not. Justin, you're gonna love this." 
    "Yes," Toshiro said. "Most serious. Baffling." 
    "What in the world are you talking about?" Justin asked.
    "Linda's working the new stuff up in the waldo room, let her tell you," Joe Sikes said. "We've had little problems at the mining site before. This is a big one, but maybe it's just more of the same." 
    "Which will do well enough," Toshiro said. 
    "You sound worried."
    Toshiro shrugged. "Concerned. A setback." 
    "Hell, you're not going to live long enough to go back to Japan no matter what happens," Justin said. "So you can stop worrying." 
    Toshiro smiled politely.
    "Well, it's true," Justin said. "Coming back with me?" 
    "Thank you, I am on duty here," Toshiro said.
    Justin nodded and crossed the large central control room toward the green door at its far end.
    "That wasn't very nice," Joe Sikes told him. He jerked his head toward Toshiro, who was now absorbed in some kind of computer game involving medieval Japanese warriors.
    "Well, yeah, you're right, but it's still true," Justin said. "There's no way we'll build enough industry to fire up Geographic and go back to Earth or anywhere else. Not that I'd go. I can't figure why he wants to."
    Edgar Sikes shrugged. "Beats me, I guess. I asked him once." 
    "What'd he say?" 
    "Roots." 
    "Eh?"
    "Roots. Can't say I blame him. How'd you feel if you were the only white kid here?" 
    "I don't think I'd notice."
    "Toshiro does," Edgar said. "There were four Orientals in the Earth Born, but they're all dead in the Grendel Wars. Anyway, that's what he said. I asked him why he wanted to see Earth again, and he said 'Roots.' "
    The waldo room was at the rear of the telecommunications building. "Cassandra, ready or not, here I come," Justin said, and waited for the door to open. It didn't. He frowned.
    "Sorry, I've been doing some reprogramming," Edgar said. "Let Justin in, please, Cassandra." The door swung open.
    He was immediately assailed by a sweet-sour triple dose of Eau de Diaper. His sister Linda was seated at the robotics control panel. Her blond pigtails made her look even younger than her seventeen years. She leaned back into a thick leather chair, silvered goggles covering her eyes. She might have been asleep. A hand-carved cradle that could have been built in the fourteenth century, but in fact was a product of Carlos's workshop, stood next to her workstation. A three-month-old baby watched as if he knew what his mother was doing.
    Joe shushed the baby unnecessarily, then tiptoed over to Linda and planted a big juicy one on her lips.
    Sis leapt out of the illusion sputtering, waving her hands in alarm. Then she pulled her goggles off, and sighed.
    "Joe Sikes, I hate when you do that." She peeled off her headset, and stood to hug Justin.
    "Hey, Cad," he said to the baby. The three-month-old was still fat and wrinkly, his stubby little fingers reaching out and trying to grasp a chunk of the world. His watery blue eyes struggled to focus.
    Linda had discovered boys when she was fourteen, and when she was fifteen they discovered her right back. She had been extremely popular and enjoyed every minute of it, a dozen lovers in as many weeks. Then she was pregnant, and suddenly she was tired of casual sex, tired of popularity, tired of the game.
    And bang, she was attached to Joe Sikes, elderly, slope-shouldered, hardworking Joe Sikes. Justin remembered thinking it was pure lust. His little sister was one of those rare women who became almost ethereally beautiful as she swelled and neared term. If so, lust had ripened into something more stable-but a palpable erotic haze still shimmered in the air between them. His step-sister had found a husband and lover. She had also found a friend and teacher, and under Joe's instruction was rapidly developing into one of the most capable of the Second's engineers. Now she studied-Aaron had once said that while the First had ice on their minds, Linda had integral equations on hers-worked, and nursed her baby, and the only way to see her was to come to the command center.
    "What we got?" Joe Sikes asked. His forefinger traced a lazy circle on the back of her neck.
    "Geographic relays checked out," Linda said. "I'm certain that the, uh . . . will you stop that for a moment? Thank you. Nothing garbled in transmission. We're getting the right data, and it still looks the same, there are explosions in the mines." 
    "Explosions," Justin said.
    "In the mines," Edgar repeated. "Ain't we got fun?" 
    "That sounds-" Justin stopped. "Can't be grendels." 
    "Unless they've learned to use grenades," Edgar said. 
    "Now, there's a grim thought. Something break in?" 
    "Not bloody likely," Joe Sikes said.
    Justin nodded agreement. The mines didn't exactly have doors. "So what is it? Machinery failure?"
    Linda looked worried. Her face was thinner than Jessica's but somehow softer at the same time. Little Cad had been good for her-good for the elder Weyland, as well. At least six children would eventually call Cadmann "Granddad." Colonel Weyland doted on all of them, but Cadzie, as the colonel's first namesake, would get special attention. Justin felt a pang of jealousy, followed by an answering pang of shame.
    "I'll do a show-and-tell at the meeting tonight," Joe said. "We'll want to make an emergency trip up in maybe a week." He was pugnacious and happy, and Justin didn't understand that.
    "You think it's that serious?"
    "Kid, this isn't a conveyor belt breakdown. Here-Cassandra, show us Mine Disaster Three." A phantasm formed above a holopad. It looked like an ant farm done in neon vermilion.
    Joe set his blinking cursor where several tunnels joined in an angular lump. "It looked like a momentary flare of heat-very sharp-here in the processing equipment. And the sensors actually burned out. Weird. The entire assembly is completely jammed. The repair robots can't get to them. It's like something warped the entire unit out of alignment. Linda took a sonic profile of the entire operation. Look at the patterns of vibration leading up to the incident-" 
    A graph of sound patterns replaced the ant farm: the usual jagged hills and valleys produced by running machinery, punctuated by a sudden and violent pulse.
    "We're going to translate that into sound. Listen-"
    Chug chug chug. 
    Tung.
    "Jesus Christ," Justin said.
    Joe's lips twisted in a bitter smile. "The Merry Pranksters."
    For a moment, nobody said anything. Then Justin cleared his throat. "That's a pretty nasty accusation. They've never done anything like this." 
    "First time for everything." 
    "You're just unhappy about getting wet."
    "Nah, that was fun." He looked at Edgar and got an answering nod. "This is something else."
    "So how could they have done it?" Justin demanded. "The only way to get all the way to the mining site is with Robor. Or one of the Minervas. God knows they're under control. How could they get in?"
    "And that would be the point, now, wouldn't it?" Joe's usually even tones went flat and nasty. "It was impossible to carve fifty-foot buttocks on Isenstine Glacier, wasn't it? And wasn't it impossible to use seismic charges to send Morse code limericks to the geological station?" 
    Justin restrained a chuckle, and raised a hand in protest. "That may be true-but they've never done anything destructive, and you know it. What would be the point? This isn't their style, Joe." 
    Joe's head cocked, and he waited. 
    "This isn't funny! It's just vandalism."
    Joe patted Linda's shoulder possessively. "It was just a matter of time before they crossed the line," he said. "The point was always to get our attention, wasn't it? I know that there are certain residents of Surf's Up-"
    Justin started to protest, but Joe waved him off. "You may know who they are, and you may not. That doesn't concern me at the moment. What does concern me is that this has gone far enough."
    "Something goes wrong, and the first thing you do is blame it on us Star Born. We're not the only ones on this planet, Joe. If this was caused by a human being-" 
    "What else would you suggest?" 
    "Don't know. Some kind of natural phenomenon."
    "Underground explosions aren't very natural," Joe said. "Edgar has been saying the same thing. Got an answer?"
    Edgar shook his head. "Not me. Time to go relieve Toshiro." He strode off quickly.
    "Right. Edgar can't explain it and neither can you."
    Justin spread his hands helplessly. "All right, I don't think of anything, but-Suppose it was caused by a human being, why think it was one of us? You Firsts have a lot higher wacko factor."
    "I remember. 'Ice On My Mind.' Someone spelled that out in alfalfa, two years ago. HI drops functional IQ. It doesn't cause emotional damage."
    "Carolyn McAndrews," Justin said. And Mom's been getting harder to live with . . . 
    "All right, I'll give you that one," Joe said. "But I don't believe it was a First, and neither do you."
    Justin felt his fingers knot into fists. "Double-talk. All of you came to this planet coasting on your freezing intellectual egos. Thought you were the smartest things in the known universe. Then most of you lost a few points-some more than that. Add the Grendel Wars. Pretty high fear factor there, you know? Hey, sis-does Joe still wake up screaming? Still scaring Cadzie at two in the morning . . . ?" 
    "Stop it," Linda said. Her voice was coldly serious, "And stop it now." 
    "You're crossing the line, Justin," Joe said. 
    "You too," Linda said, but it didn't sound the same.
    She's made her choice, Justin thought. And it's not any of the Second. To hell with that. "Just remember that. There is a line-" 
    "Justin-"
    "No, Sis, let me finish. There is a line, and we'd better both remember it. You can say Surf's Up did this as a prank-but it's your side doesn't want anyone going to the mainland. We all want to go."
    "So do I," Joe reminded him. "No quarrel there. Now let me give you something to think about. How do you suppose we were chosen to come on this expedition?"
    "I've read all about it," Justin said. "Cassandra has the records."
    "Like hell she does," Sikes said. "Cassandra has the official records, but they're dry as dust. Laddie, some of us worked to get here. Did you ever think who chose the colonists?"
    "Well, it was a board appointed by the directors of the Geographic Society," Justin said. "So?"
    "A board of shrinks," Sikes said. "Psychiatrists and social workers. Ruth Moskowitz was one of them. And they picked just the kind of people you'd expect them to." 
    Justin frowned. "I don't see what you're getting at." 
    "No, I suppose you wouldn't," Sikes said. "Let me put it this way. Damn near all the colonists were exactly the sort of people the shrinks wanted them to be. Colonel Weyland was an exception, a military man picked for his profession. Then there was Carlos. He qualified on brains, but the shrinks would never have picked him, so his father bribed the selection board. He wanted Carlos as far from the family as possible. As for the rest-" Joe shrugged. "Some were people the shrinks approved of, and some, a few, maybe more than a few, wanted to go so bad they worked at it, found out what the shrinks were looking for, and played head games." 
    "And you were one of those?"
    "Maybe it's time-" Whatever Linda had been about to say was drowned out by the sudden wails of the baby. Linda glared at both of them. She swept her child into her, arms, holding him close. "There . . . there." She kissed his wrinkly forehead. "Just stop it, both of you. I don't know who the Merry Pranksters are, but I can't believe that anyone, First or Second, would do something like this deliberately. It's not funny, it's dangerous." 
    "So what is it?" Joe demanded.
    "I don't know. I think it's the planet surprising us again. And that damned eel has got everyone upset." 
    Justin searched his heart, searching for the voice that would say that she was right, or wrong. She was right. 
    "All right," he said finally.
    Linda grinned. "Now, I can't have two of my four favorite men mad at each other . . . "
    "Four?" Joe forced his mouth into a neutral position.
    "Sure, now that Cadzie is here . . ." 
    "And your brother, I guess . . . and Cadmann?" 
    "Sure."
    And whoever was the father of the baby would make five, Justin thought. He could see that Joe Sikes was thinking the same thing. There was a long and awkward pause. "Linda, isn't there some way to find Dad?"
    She shrugged. "Edgar might be able to. He's smarter than I am."
    Justin kissed Cadzie good-bye, and went back out to the main room. Edgar had taken Toshiro's place at the main console and was splitting his attention, watching some kind of holoplay through his goggles. Toshiro had another set. Whatever they were doing it was together, and not visible to anyone not wearing the head-mounted displays. Justin thumped him on the back of the head. "Edgar?" 
    "Yeah?"
    "About that favor you owe me. I know that my dad doesn't have his tracer turned on, but can you locate him?" 
    Edgar flipped the lid of his lenses up. He stood up to stretch, elaborately, fingers linked over his head. His pudgy body was an upright spear, its tip twisting in a slow circle. Edgar had hurt his back, long ago, and it had never quite healed.
    "Go straight into Sun Salutation," Toshiro said. "Head loose as you come down. Hands farther back, take your weight with just your arms as you jump straight back . . . hold it . . . elbows back, down slowly. Now inhale, chest forward-"
    Edgar was puffing a little as his head and shoulders came up, but he was way improved since the-last time Justin had seen him. Toshiro's training was having its effect. Short of breath, but he wasn't complaining. Edgar finished the sequence, grinned at Justin while he emptied and refilled his lungs, and said, "Cadmann's not wearing a personal tracer. He disabled the tracer on the skeeter." 
    "Dad likes his privacy." 
    "You bet. I don't know exactly where his lodge is." 
    "Nobody does, except it's south of Isenstine Glacier."
    Edgar grinned at him wickedly. "Well . . . what's in it for me?" 
    "First pick, next catch." 
    "Even stringfish?" 
    "No problem." 
    "Well, okay. Take over the watch, Toshiro-san?" 
    "Certainly. I relieve you, Edgar-san."
    "Thanks. Okay, Justin, let's see what I've got." Edgar led him over to another console away from where Toshiro sat. "Geographic has images of the fuel dumps he uses. Here-" Edgar's fingers tapped silently at a virtual keyboard display. The wall in front of them turned into a vast field of ice and rock: the wasted expanse of Isenstine Glacier that fed both the Amazon and Miskatonic. Three tiny dots glowed redly. "There. About eight hundred miles apart."
    "Spare fuel cells. Each cell takes him about five hundred miles. So he carries two backups, and has emergency dumps as well. That's Dad." 
    "Not that they're roughly in a straight line-" 
    "And the last one ends about three hundred miles north of the end of the glacier. Dad and Moms are collecting plants. The nearest cacti are probably six hundred miles from the south tip of the glacier." 
    "So the lodge is probably in this area somewhere-" 
    "Assuming that the straight line holds true," Justin said. 
    "Yeah. Well, additional evidence-"
    Edgar spoke softly to Cassandra. "Cassie, I want to look at previous dates when Colonel Weyland took his tracers off-line." 
    "Weyland data is restricted," Cassandra said.
    "Pretty please," Edgar said, and muttered something else Justin couldn't hear.
    "Wilco," Cassandra said.
    Edgar grinned. "Search Geographic satellite watch for unusual infrared spots during just those periods." He looked at Justin, face screwed up in speculation. "Ha. Has he ever made an emergency landing?"
    "Last year. A rotor almost went. He was down overnight." Justin searched his memory. "And three years ago. Got caught in a bad storm. Put down overnight." 
    "The rotor should be on the maintenance records." Edgar muttered to Cassandra. Thermal maps of the glacier flashed by, held for the dates that Cadmann Weyland was known to be on one of his jaunts, and then rolled on. Justin watched in fascination as Edgar searched until two map images came into focus. They looked as if they had been taken from about two miles up, and on each of them, tiny heat pulses flared.
    "Campfires." Edgar was utterly smug. "The dates probably match. Your dad put down overnight. First one matches the maintenance record. Second . . . ah. It was one of those nasty little solar-flare storms. Must have gotten hairy up on Isenstine." 
    "And?"
    "Your dad took a hard left turn here. Tricky. Then . . . Skeeter range is five hundred miles. Your father carries at least one spare, and doesn't like to space his fuel dumps further than eight hundred miles apart. That probably puts him about here-" 
    "Give me a vegetation map," Justin said.
    Cassandra displayed some of the vegetation to be found in the area. "He brought back some Avalon succulents last time. Does that narrow things?"
    Cassandra searched, and came up with a twenty-square-mile sprawl that met all of the conditions.
    "Not bad," Justin said. "Look for heat sources." Four little pulses of red appeared. "Volcanic, on a cycle?" 
    "I've got a better idea," Edgar replied. "Cassandra-when was the last routine scan?"
    Her familiar voice was warm and cool. "Eighteen hours ago, at the present level of magnification."
    "Nighttime. Give me a thermal scan. Compare it to the chart we just made . . . and compare it again to . . . say, anything before three days ago, back to a month." 
    Edgar turned to Justin. "Does that about cover it? When was the last time your dad was out?" 
    "About two months."
    "Good enough. So all we should have out there are some geysers, and maybe another hunter. Not likely in that little area, but maybe. Exclude all of that, and we'll have his campfire . . . "
    "He likes wood-burning stoves," Justin said suddenly. "He's got a cabin, but it'll have a chimney." 
    "And . . . bingo."
    They were looking directly down at a mass of trees near the eastern edge of Isenstine glacier. "Camouflaged," Edgar mused. "You could skeeter right over and never see it. That fire is stone dead now."
    "Dad would put the fire out. He's very serious about that kind of thing."
    "So. Time for the stove to cool. Figure he left five hours ago . . . "
    Edgar rolled his eyes up, and thought. "With refueling . . . the skeeters make about a hundred and eighty kilometers tops . . . he should be right about . . ." He poked his finger at the map. "Here. Give or take fifty kilometers or so." 
    He grinned up at Justin. "Betcha," he said, and went for magnification. Geographic wasn't in position, but he diverted one of the weather satellites to optical mode. Cassandra kept cleaning up the image, searching for something moving against a white background . . .
    They went in through the mountains, and past the savage crevasses of Isenstine Glacier. Justin could almost feel the cold.
    And there it was, a flickering shadow. A red circle enclosed it and Cassandra zoomed in to show something that looked like a brine shrimp larva skittering across a pond. It was there one moment, gone the next. But Cassandra was on its track, now, locked on, and Cadmann was caught.
    It was Skeeter II, its silver-blue length magnified by satellite optics. The view was from not quite overhead. It was a tiny bit of metal and plastic, a thing of Man flying across an impersonal wasteland. It carried plant samples and three of the human beings Justin Faulkner loved most in all the world.
    "He'll need to make one more fuel stop," Edgar said. He laced his fingers behind his head and leaned back in his seat. His round face wore a smile of enormous self-satisfaction. "But that won't take fifteen minutes. This close to home he'll probably want to push it. I'd set ETA at about three hours." 
    "Edgar . . . " Justin grinned. "Sometimes . . . " 
    "I know," Edgar said. "Sometimes I amaze even me." 
    "Three hours before he shows . . . " Justin glanced at his watch. "I want to get at him with a full report before anyone else can tell him what's happened." He squeezed Edgar's shoulder. "Thanks a lot, Edgar." 
    "First choice. Stringfish." 
    "You got it."
    Justin ran out of the communications room, ideas and thoughts of saltwater eels swimming dizzily in his head.


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 4

MOUNT TUSHMORE

To compare 
Great things with small . . .
-JOHN MILTON, Paradise Lost

    The eastern wind turned unexpectedly fierce, burning right through the furs surrounding Cadmann Weyland's face, numbing him to the bone. It had swept across two hundred miles of Isenstine Glacier, picking up speed and dropping in temperature as it came. He shaded his face and cursed as he hauled the replacement battery across the intervening few meters between the fuel dump and Skeeter II.
    Mary Ann remained in the cockpit, her cowled face visible through the powdered flurries. She would wait there until the last minute before jumping out to lend a hand. She had always hated the cold.
    Sylvia, on the other hand, loved it. She was locking up the foamed plastic dump shed, motions brisk and merry. "That was the last one!" she called over the wind. "We'll have to restock before we take our next run!" Then she crunched across the ice to help with the pushing.
    Mary Ann climbed out of the skeeter when they were about ten feet away, and opened the battery bay. She was reluctant, but deft, and had the old trunk-sized cartridge out in about fifteen seconds. It didn't require three of them to lock the new battery into place, but it was good to have the extra hands: unsnap the used-up power cell, swing it to the side, swing new unit into place, snap on connections, slide in, lock down.
    Mary Ann shut the unit, puffed a breath of condensation, and said, "Let's get out of here!"
    They piled into the autogyro's passenger cab. Cadmann was on pilot's position on the right, Mary Ann in the middle. Sylvia on the extreme left was last in, and slammed the door behind her. Mary Ann cranked the air blower up to a toasty pitch.
    Cadmann watched the wind gauge to get a feel for the gusts. He couldn't take off if they continued to build. The gusts punched at the little gyro, rocking it, but not so hard now. Curtains of powdered snow danced across the glacier in front of them in a somberly beautiful winter ballet.
    Mary Ann interrupted his thoughts with a plaintive "Can we get out of here? Please?" She hated that little-girl petulance quality in her voice, but it was there too often. She closed her eyes and hunched forward to catch a little more of the hot air. Cadmann caught Sylvia's eye. She winked at him, and put an arm around Mary Ann to help warm her. Even with the thirty pounds she'd gained since their second child, Mary Ann possessed little tolerance for cold weather, but despite her discomfort she rarely let Cadmann and Sylvia go on these trips without her.
    There were times when Mary Ann couldn't accept comforting from Sylvia, when any gesture of kindness or warmth triggered a burst of resentment. This wasn't one of them. They pushed tight against each other. Sylvia tucked a thermal blanket around them both. Sylvia's teeth were chattering, but she still managed to smile.
    "Cad?" she said. "If you don't get this thing into the air, we may walk home."
    He nodded without speaking, still trying to read the gusts. He patched into Cassandra on a secure line, and got a quick weather feed: no sign of the quick, violent storms that made traversing Isenstine so hazardous. This was just bad wind, not likely to get much worse. Carefully he engaged the engines, satisfied with the steady hum as the new fuel cell sparked to life. Nose and top and tail rotors spun into blurred motion one at a time, whipping more snow from the ground. He engaged the de-icers and the wiper blades.
    "All right. Buckle in," he said unnecessarily. He was almost embarrassed to say that to adults. It was just a habit he had gotten into, three kids ago. The kids were pretty much grown now, but the reflex remained.
    The skeeter leaned forward against the wind and began to scoot along the ice. Then, nose-heavy, it lifted from the ground, spun a quarter-turn as a gust punched them, and rose into the sky.
    Mary Ann poked her head out from under the blanket and breathed a sigh of relief. "Bet it's calmer up about two thousand feet," she said.
    "Bet you're right," he said. His hands were locked surely on the controls now. At eighteen hundred feet they hit low cloud cover, rocked for fifteen seconds, and then climbed up into relative stillness.
    Tau Ceti transmuted the clouds into banks of gold-white fluff. The air was crisp and clear. The window didn't quite seal on his side, and a bright, Arctic thread of air whistled through, stinging and invigorating.
    This was good, one of those moments that made the rest of it all worthwhile. He felt the calm descend upon Sylvia and Mary Ann as well. Here, floating above the clouds, there seemed to be no troubles. Tau Ceti IV was a world of wonders, a calm and nurturing land which would feed and shelter their grandchildren as graciously as it served them. This was a time when he could forget the internecine conflicts within the colony, and the occasional friction between Mary Ann and Sylvia.
    There had been less of that for the past year. He thought . . . he hoped . . . they had weathered the last true storm in their triad. There were too few Western precedents for three-way relationships.
    There was nothing standard about relationships on Avalon. The naked truth was that, in an almost exclusively heterosexual community, there were more women than men to bond with them. There was also no venereal disease. There was one hundred percent employment. Someone would care for the children, whatever the mother's interests and temperament. As a result, no woman need consider anything except who might make the most interesting father. There was no stigma at all for the unwed mother.
    But some institutions die hard, and marriage, even such free-form versions of it as existed in Avalon Town, was one of them.
    Cadmann and Sylvia had been friends, perhaps in love but not lovers, when the first grendel attacks shattered the colony's tranquil life and sent Cadmann off to the Bluff. Mary Ann had gone to him then, and helped build the Keep. It was as much hers as his.
    Cadmann and Mary Ann had been bonded for years before Sylvia, widowed during the Grendel Wars, had joined them. Mostly, it worked. Sometimes wonderfully well. Occasionally it grated . . . usually on Mary Ann, who remembered when she had Cadmann all to herself, when no one else would have wanted him. No one but Sylvia, who was already married, back when monogamy made sense, before the grendels killed so many of the men.
    They were probably two hours from the Bluff, and Mary Ann was getting drowsy. Air travel often did that to her. She leaned against his shoulder, bouncing a little in her shoulder harness. Sylvia looked across at him. Sometimes he wondered exactly what she saw. He knew what he saw in the mirror when he scraped his morning stubble away: a tall, gray old stranger who looked a lot like his own grandfather . . . or Manuel the Redeemer, or any of Cabell's male characters who were so surprised to find themselves old. Still strong, and unbent, but the hair crept back from his temples now. Both weather and time had creased his skin deeply.
    God. Where had the years gone? When was the last time he had awakened without his back flaming at him? He was . . . he counted rapidly. Sixty-three Earth years old? There was little he could do to avoid the fact that his body was trying to shut down on him. Oh, growth-hormone stimulation, and exercise, and a strict nutritional regimen, and regeneration treatments kept the machine functioning better than he probably deserved, but the aches and pains of a life nowise tame had definitely caught up with him. There were bullet wounds, a bayonet scar . . . even a goddamn crocodile bite.
    All trivial next to the wounds from the Grendel Wars. Bones smashed. The regrown leg. The pale angry tattoo left by serrated grendel teeth. And the memories that would never completely fade.
    And perhaps, after all, it was best that they didn't. The grendels were gone, but there were other dangers.
    "Good trip," Sylvia said. She could always sense his mood. She was forty-seven now, still beautiful, although daily exposure to the sun had roughened her skin. The mask of youth was beginning to slip, but in her case that was no tragedy. Disguise your thoughts and inclinations as you may, time eventually reveals your true nature to the world. Sylvia was a loving heart in a lively, quick-spirited physical package, a little shorter than Mary Ann, but stronger. She had borne her late husband Terry one child, Justin, and then another for Cadmann, and her figure was still luscious.
    Mary Ann was Number One Wife-and she relished the distinction. Needed it. There was little in this life for Mary Ann, save being Cadmann Weyland's woman. Sylvia remained a competent scientist. Mary Ann had ice on her mind. Sometimes she could remember, sometimes there were flashes of brilliance, but sometimes she was lucky to remember the difference between the gametophyte and sporophyte stages of a fern. Once upon a time she had been a brilliant agronomist, but hibernation instability . . . for Mary Ann, the memories of what she had once been were the worst part.
    She was still important as Cadmann Weyland's Number One Wife, and as the mother of strong and self-reliant children. I make good babies, she told herself, and everyone knew it was true. Over the years that had come to be enough. It had to be.
    Home, Cadmann thought, remembering Sylvia's attempt at conversation. "I think I want to break out the east wall of the house, expand it again." 
    "You've got my permission, God knows." 
    She gazed out the window at the clear sky, and then peered down at the clouds. "So peaceful up here." 
    "I need these trips from time to time. Just get away with my ladies."
    She reached across Mary Ann's sleeping form, and grasped Cadmann's shoulder hard. So much unsaid. So much that could never be said.
    Cadmann's thoughts threatened to drift into another uncomfortable direction, and he focused back on the task of flying. Ahead of them reared a great beveled splay of glacial crust: Clay's Divide, an eight-mile seismic irregularity in the Isenstine. He grinned, anticipating the moment to come.
    As the skeeter scooted over the gargantuan sheet of rock and ice, Sylvia began to chuckle. Then they both broke out hooting. Mary Ann was awake now, and smiling. The far side of the divide had been carved-by some unknown thermal device-into Avalon's own Mount Rushmore. Presented for all the world to see were four two-hundred-foot-tall sets of very human buttocks. Anatomical detail was admirably precise. Mount Tushmore was so huge that it had to be seen from at least a kilometer away to be fully appreciated.
    Geographic had spotted it first, almost a year before. The general hilarity and grudging admiration was balanced by alarm. How had they done it? And who? Well, the Merry Pranksters, of course, but who were they? Justin and Jessica knew, Cadmann thought; one or the other of them might actually be a Prankster. But there was no way that the carving of Mount Tushmore could have been anything less than perilous. The danger doubtless added to their pleasure in the deed.
    "If we knew . . ." he said finally, hovering at approximately anus-level with the second buttock on the left. A flat, petal-shaped protrusion marred the surface just below the right cheek. " . . . whether that was just an irregularity in the rock, or a birthmark, it might be possible to figure out just whose buttocks these were . . . "
    "But . . ." Sylvia choked, "and that's a big but . . . that still wouldn't establish whether the owner of said birthmarked buttocks was in fact the perpetrator." 
    "How true," Cadmann said. "It would be just like those rascals to display someone else's buttocks, just to throw us . . . off the scent. As it were." 
    "Ahem."
    He spun the skeeter around and headed back north. He pointed his forefinger at Mary Ann, thumb cocked, and Mary Ann said, "I do hate to leave it behind."

    About fifty miles from the Bluff, Cadmann engaged his communications link. Immediately Cassandra's familiar voice said, "There are seventeen messages waiting for you, Colonel." 
    He sighed. "Any of them emergency?"
    "In case of an emergency message I would have initiated contact despite your request for isolation," she chided gently. "You have several priority dispatches, but no emergency." 
    "Hmmm . . . sort and play."
    There was a beep, and before Cassandra could broadcast an old message, the air crackled. "Dad! Are you there?" 
    "Absolutely. Justin?" 
    "Glad you 're on line." 
    "Problems?" 
    "We've had a little excitement since you left." 
    "Like what?"
    "That would be telling. Why don't you just fly straight to Aquatics, Dad-and promise me something?" 
    "Like what?" 
    "That you'll try to keep an open mind." 
    "You implying I have a problem in that department?" 
    "First edition: Oxford-Avalonian Dictionary. Verb: Weylandize. Definition: to render inflexible." 
    "Hah hah. Want to give me a hint?"
    "I think not. See you in about twenty minutes. And first-class promise about that open mind, remember?" 
    "Remember."
    Cadmann took himself back off line for a moment. Mary Ann was shaking herself awake. "What was that?" 
    "Our eldest boy. He's got a surprise for me. At Aquatics . . ." His thumb hovered over the control panel. If he touched the switch again, Cassandra would come back on, and in all probability tell him more about the surprise than he really wanted to hear. 
    I'll let it be a mystery, he thought.
    All right, Justin, m'boy. Thrill me.

    The skeeter pad was clear as they dropped down toward Aquatics. A small crowd had already gathered around it, with another clutch of curiosity-seekers ringing one of the dolphin pens. Dolphins . . . ? Had Quanda and Hipshot finally made the beast with two backs, or whatever it was that dolphins did? But that wouldn't be a priority call-
    He hovered for a moment, until the crowd backed farther away. There had only been one skeeter accident on Avalon, but that was enough. A sudden gust of wind, and Harry Siep's arm was spurting in the dust. Lucky for Harry. It could have been his head, and heads were much more difficult to reattach.
    They spun down into a perfect landing. Mary Ann threw aside her blanket, and stretched like a big chubby blond cat as the rotors began to slow. Before Cadmann could open the door Jessica was there, golden and radiant, flinging it aside to buss him soundly.
    Seeing her made him sigh. She possessed all of her mother's beauty, and she didn't have ice on her mind. "Daddy," she whispered in his ear, as intimate as a lover, "we've really got something."
    He stepped down from the skeeter, and was immediately awash in comments from the rest of the crowd. He waved an awkward hello. As always, he had the sense that the group was waiting for something. Some proclamation, some reaction from him. They hung on his words as if his opinion meant more than all the rest of theirs combined. It was this as much as anything that created his intermittent need to escape, to be off in the south hunting, or fishing, or collecting plants. On such trips he turned his goddamned tracer off. Nothing but an emergency message was authorized to break through. Zack had "tested" that precisely once. No one else even tried.
    Cadmann helped Mary Ann down, and she immediately turned to hug Jessica. Occasionally he suspected that there was some communication between mother and daughter from which he was utterly excluded, some dark and intimate female understanding.
    At the moment Jessica was all showboat, twinkly and vibrating with secret knowledge, hugging Sylvia to give both mothers equal attention, then linking arms with Cadmann. Without another word she marched the three of them into the Aquatics building.
    Justin opened the door for them. 
    Cadmann entered, and held his breath.
    "Jesus Christ . . ." he started. He was frozen, felt the chill right down to his heels. The beast reminded him of a moray, in some ways . . . but it was a good deal larger. "You dredge this out of the Deeps?"
    "Damn near grabbed it out of your living room, Dad," Jessica said. Justin quickly recounted their adventure. Cadmann stared at Sylvia and then at Mary Ann. He excused himself brusquely and went outside to break through the ring of observers surrounding the dolphin tank. He needed a look at the beast itself.
    A large yellowish plastic bubble framed the tank, and several wet oily splotches on the inside suggested that the eel had attempted escape. It glided through the water, swishing hard from side to side, around and around endlessly, expending vast energy. Jessica and Justin appeared behind him.
    "Does it eat?"
    "Sure does. Anything that swims. The dolphins have been sharing." 
    "Has Big Chaka looked at this yet?"
    "He'll fly in from the coast this evening," Jessica said. "Little Chaka's run a simulation."
    "And?"
    Little Chaka spoke from just behind him. The voice was always deep and resonant, and a little surprising because it came from slightly above him. Only two people in the world were taller than Cadmann. "It lived in the Deeps," Chaka said, "and came upstream to lay eggs." 
    "It eats fish. Land animals too?"
    "If it could swallow them whole. It's not built to carve out steaks. But I think we're seeing it at the end of its life cycle. This is an old creature. What passes for a liver is operating at maybe fifty percent. I think it will be dead in a year. Have to ask Father, of course." 
    "Could it have had legs early in its cycle?" 
    "Interesting idea, but Cassandra says no. The eggs are almost mature-" 
    "Eggs?"
    "Yes, we've got samples. What she's producing are thousands of little eely things that look just like Mama. No sign of legs. I think that Mama Eel is primarily aquatic, and can survive out of the water just long enough to get back upstream. She really prefers salt water to fresh. No sign of speed sacs or anything like them. This is a pretty standard animal. Not a lot of surprises."
    Cadmann heard Chaka's voice as if it came from the bottom of a rain barrel. A sudden wave of fatigue washed over him, hot and clammy, transmuting his limbs to lead. In his suddenly blurred vision, the thing in the water began to transmute. It grew legs, and its tail fattened. It reared up out of the tank with its huge, savagely powerful teeth drizzling blood, and snapped down just inches from his foot, and-
    He shook his head, and all was normal again. A perfectly harmless eel swished angrily through the water. Harmless. Captured.
    Swish, swish.
    "So why has it come back?" 
    "To breed," someone said.
    "What Colonel Weyland meant was why now?" Chaka said. "And we don't know." 
    Cadmann turned to stare northward toward the mainland. 
    "Dad, we'll have to go," Jessica said.
    He nodded. The eel would start that debate again. It was time for a full-dress expedition to the mainland, had been for years. He'd always known they would have to go there.
    Someday. He had no taste for it. After the Grendel Wars, he had thought he wanted that, and had made two trips to the mainland, the second shorter than the first. He had bagged a grendel with the new grendel guns, and been holo'ed grinning next to his prize.
    But something had altered within him, some subtle tidal change in his bones.
    If there was anything he needed to prove about himself, he would prove it here, on the island. And if there was anything that he needed to know about grendels, he would allow others to learn it for him.
    He lived with awful, bloody dreams in which all of their efforts had meant nothing. In his sleeping mind, rapacious demons had rolled over the colony like a red tide, killing everything, everyone. The few dozen survivors stranded up in Geographic could hear the screams, and see the blood, but they couldn't come down. Couldn't ever come down. And stayed up there until they slowly ran out of food . . . and water . . . and air.
    Waking, he would shrug away the dreams. He didn't want to know how narrowly sanity had been preserved. And when he thought about going back to the mainland, he wondered what would happen if another grendel ever touched him. He wondered if he could take it. If his sanity would hold. 
    He didn't ever want to find out.
    " . . . Zack," Justin said, pulling him out of his reverie. 
    "Zack?" 
    "Wants to kill it. And the eggs."
    He felt an instantaneous, visceral flash of agreement, followed swiftly by the voice of reason. "As long as it's not dangerous that's not his decision to make," Cadmann said. He pointed to the tank cover. "Your idea?" 
    Jessica looked sheepish. "Zack ordered a cover." 
    "Good."
    She hesitated. "We didn't put it on, until the eel tried to escape. Took three of us with poles to keep it in. Then we put up the cover."
    "Not when Zack told you to?" 
    "No, sir." 
    "He had the authority to order that. Do you dispute it?" 
    "No, Dad, it just seemed-"
    Cadmann shook his head. "Jessica, we've been through this before. Zack is chairman and governor, and we don't lightly disobey him." 
    "You did. You rebelled-"
    "Exactly," Cadmann said. "I rebelled. Some things are important enough for that. But you don't do it lightly! I take it your researchers found the cover inconvenient--" She looked at her feet.
    "So you ignored a valid order because it wasn't convenient. Do I have to say anything else?"
    "No, sir. But he wanted to kill it, too! And we found it at the Bluff, not down here!"
    "And at the Bluff you and your brother had every right to do what you thought right," Cadmann said wearily. "Not here." 
    "It'll go to a vote," Jessica said. "Can we rely on you?" 
    "To approve keeping it alive? Yes." He thought for a moment. "That's not all that will go to a vote. The next question will be about the mainland, you know. We need that major expedition. Not just quick trips to initiate Grendel Scouts, a study expedition . . . "
    "Yes," Justin said. "Joe Sikes thinks so too. Something's going wrong with the mining robots." 
    Something in Justin's tone made Cadmann frown. "Eh?" 
    "Don't know. Joe thinks it's Star Born. But it's not, it's another Avalon surprise."
    Cadmann nodded. "And the ecology returns to Camelot. The wind blows from the north part of the year. God knows what may get rafted over here. We have to know what else may come."
    "Avalonian homing pigeons," Justin offered. Jessica looked pained. "And no grendels here to eat them. We're likely to be up to our clavicles in something." 
    "There haven't been for twenty years," Jessica offered.
    "There weren't any eels for twenty years, either," Justin said.
    Cadmann frowned. "Good point. And the ecology is returning. Not just the eel. Why now?" He nodded in submission. "I suppose there will need to be . . . some kind of expedition."
    "We can plan it on the next Grendel Scout outing," Justin said.
    "Safety-"
    Justin grinned. "We can work that out, Dad. We can work it all out. We just want to know that, if it comes to a fight, you'll be on our side." 
    Cadmann hesitated.
    "Or at least not against us," Jessica added swiftly.
    Cadmann considered them both. The fear was in him, dammit, not in them. Fear would be a horrible legacy to bestow upon his children. And-it was their world, more and more it was their world. They hadn't asked to be born here.
    Cadmann often wondered what the children-the Star Born-thought about that. Did they resent being born here, denied the heritage of Earth? Earth, the solar system, crowded, teeming with humanity, and with the crowding came rules, rules, rules-He had come here to escape the rules. And now they had rules because they couldn't trust their own damaged brains. 
    And it's their world, not ours.
    "Open mind," he said. "I'm already bound, right, Justin?"


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 5

THE MODERN PROMETHEUS

God bless the King, I mean the Faith's Defender; 
God bless-no harm in blessing-the Pretender; 
But who Pretender is, or who is King, 
God bless us all-that's quite another thing.
-JOHN BYROM, to an officer in the Army

    The debate was already in full swing as Cadmann entered the town hall. The hall fairly shimmered with the aromas of the communal meal: mutton and turkey, bakery smells, mustard greens, and steamed corn fresh from the fields. It was a laughing, murmuring, jostling family chaos. Three hundred, nearly every Earth Born, most of the Star Born, all of the Grendel Scouts, many children. There were tables and seats for more than seven hundred, and that was a reminder of what population they had expected to have before the grendels nearly destroyed them.
    The tables were tiered in amphitheater rows beneath the corrugated roof, grouped around a central stage. And on that stage a tall, stocky, golden young man stood at the podium, commanding their attention by his words and stance and very being. His voice was a master orator's. Every word from the thin, sensuous mouth cut as precisely as a razor. He was Cadmann's height, and beautifully muscled. A shock of flaxen hair fell to his shoulders. His eyes were a startling blue-green, electric in their intensity. Tau Ceti had burnt his eyebrows so blond they were almost white.
    The young man's cheeks were healthfully hollow, his every motion perfectly judged as he emphasized his major points. Almost every sentence was punctuated by a cheer from the Surf's Up contingent, come inland for the weekly debate.
    Aaron Tragon. Star Born indeed.
    Cadmann listened distractedly as he found his way to the table reserved for him by Carlos and Angelica, the thin dark surgeon who was Carlos's most recent companion.
    "-ladies in the audience will agree that the automatic tendency of most males is to assume a power structure which escalates from woman to man to God Almighty. This, at any rate, was the most frequent view of the nineteenth century-"
    Cadmann slipped in next to Carlos and slapped his shoulder. "Hola, Carlos." 
    "Hola." 
    "Hello, Dad."
    Cadmann smiled warmly at his younger son. "Ho. What brings you down from the mines?"
    Mickey shrugged and looked at Mary Ann, but he didn't say anything, which was typical for Mickey. He seldom talked and when he did not many listened to him. Mickey was smart enough, but somehow he hadn't learned to communicate.
    Cadmann stood to hug Mary Ann, and kiss Sylvia briefly. "How's the debate going?" 
    "Stevens is in trouble." 
    "Has Aaron reached the Refutatio yet?"
    "Beyond that. He's in the Digressio, and I suspect that the Peroratio will be an ass-kicker." 
    "I like the subject-"
    Even without electronic enhancement, Aaron Tragon's voice rose up to embrace them. "-Shelley's modem Prometheus intended to steal not the flames of a distant Olympus, but those of Woman. And how natural for men, reading 'Frankenstein', to be deceived by her into believing that it spoke of a man's attempt to steal the divine privilege." 
    Aaron leaned forward over his podium, slamming his palm flat against the wood. "But her mother's blood ran in her! Mary Wollstonecraft, the first feminist, author of 'The Rights of Woman', was smiling on her daughter. And when Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley wrote of a man's monstrous hubris, his ego, his attempt to stitch together from chunks of dead and decaying flesh an imitation of life, what she truly illustrated was Man's fear of Woman's creative power. His vulnerability to that fear birthed an attempt to do without her altogether."
    He paused for a dramatic moment. "Did not men's fear of women keep her a second-class citizen? Deprive her of education, of legal recourse, of the vote, of knowledge of the methods of self-defense, that she might remain chattel?" 
    Cadmann clucked to himself, and then looked across the room, seeking Zack's daughter Ruth. It took him a moment, but he picked her out. She was sitting at Rachael's side, leaning forward on her plump forearms, brown hair brushed back from her face, listening as if she were devouring every word. She was rapt, so attentive and worshipful it hurt to watch. If the girl weren't seventeen years old, he would have called it the worst case of puppy love he'd ever seen. As it was, her infatuation was just one of the colony's most notoriously open secrets. 
    In comparison . . .
    He stole a sidewise glance at Mary Ann. She leaned backward in her chair, trying to put distance between herself and Aaron Tragon. Her mouth was drawn into a thin, disapproving line. She was nodding to herself, as if indulging in some kind of internal monologue.
    So Mary Ann had a problem with Aaron. Somebody had to have one. Aside from Mary Ann, everyone just flat seemed to love the boy . . . then again, Joe Sikes wasn't all that fond of Aaron either. But it was a short list.
    Aaron Tragon was exceptional. Good at almost everything he did. For Cadmann's money, that was an overcompensation, a positive side effect of Aaron Tragon's Bottle Baby complex.
    The Bottle Babies were seventeen embryos raised totally in vitro, activated after the Grendel Wars and decanted nine months later. By then it had become clear that the fertility rate among the surviving women was quite adequate to replenish the colony, thank you, and the In Vitro project was suspended. Hundreds of embryos remained aboard Geographic. Aaron Tragon had been one of the first. Derik, the big redhead, and Trish the gorgeous black bodybuilder, and Little Chaka, who might be the strongest man on the planet, were also clustered up there in the first ten. They were Aaron's constant companions, and only Little Chaka seemed more than a follower.
    The three of them seemed to be sharing a joke on the rest of the colony, one which they declined to share.
    They were children of the colony, unrelated to anyone on the expedition, raised by everyone. With the notable exception of Little Chaka, few had bonded to anyone in particular. Mary Ann had always thought it a terrible idea. She thought they should be adopted into families, but she'd only shared her opinions with Cadmann.
    Seems to have worked out all right. They seem like decent kids. Work hard. Come to that, Aaron did live with Joe Sikes for a few years, when he was what, ten or twelve, up until Edgar had the accident . . .
    "-being a man, I stand to gain little by making these claims. Being a man of the twenty-second century, in which we might have hoped that women would be loosed from their biological bondage, perhaps I could have another intent. For is not the drive to 'free' woman from her biological 'enslavement' also an attempt to lessen her importance? To steal her fire? Are we not then a breed of Prometheans? What happens to us, when this difference is reduced to a mere whim, or a matter of legal designation? I cannot say. I merely propose an interpretation of literary pentimento. As for the rest of it, I trust that wiser minds than my own will probe whatever additional truths might be found therein." 
    Aaron Tragon bowed massively to Stevens, his challenger. Stevens was slight, scholarly, managed the mining operation east of the colony where Cadmann's son Mickey spent most of his time. Their positions in the debate had been chosen by lot. From the wildly enthusiastic applause, Cadmann guessed that Stevens had been slaughtered.
    The food service staff came around, took their orders, and brought sustenance. Cadmann relaxed into his meal, enjoying the spirited debate which surrounded him.
    Carlos shook his head. "What do you think, Cadmann?" 
    "Frankenstein as a crypto-feminist tract? Not on purpose. Nobody writes a tract that good . . . that close to immortal. How did Stevens do?"
    "His Exordium was pathetic. The Narratio was barely adequate, and his Refutatio was booed off the stage. Aside from that, just fine."
    Around them, Cadmann noticed that women's voices were climbing a bit higher than the men's. As Tragon left the stage he joined Jessica. They embraced and kissed lustily.
    They make a good pair, Cadmann thought. Aaron Tragon was brawny, handsome, fiercely intelligent, and possessed a magnetic presence. My successor here. Zack's too? End this silly division between administration and security?
    In any tribe, there is an alpha. There had been a time when Cadmann thought Mickey would be his heir. He often wondered if he had pushed his son too hard. Whatever happened, Mickey wasn't interested in leadership.
    Aaron and Linda were paired for a while. A good combination, but then something happened and Linda attached herself to Joe Sikes. An unlikely arrangement, and one that Cadmann didn't quite understand. Joe Sikes had been Mary Ann's lover before the grendel attacks, before Mary Ann had come to the Bluff to reclaim Cadmann from drunken despair. There had been nothing after that-then suddenly Joe and Mary Ann's daughter were paired, not merely paired but monogamously bonded.
    Ruth Moskowitz moved toward Aaron, then back away. She had the faintly shell-shocked grin he'd expected. Good sport. Hey, if he likes Jessica, all right. The fingers of her right hand were twisting painfully tight ringlets in her hair. Probably pulling out a few strands. Rachael put an arm around her, and held her daughter close. And that's another situation I don't understand, but I don't think I have to.
    Surf's Up provided dessert. A deliciously spiced crushed ice, its taste and aroma resurrected long-buried memories of childhood.
    The audience decided, quite vociferously, that Aaron Tragon had triumphed in the week's debate. After a thunderous round of applause, Linda Weyland took the podium. Cadzie was bundled in a sling across her chest, and nursed contentedly as she spoke.
    "Unfortunately," she began, "that concludes the evening's entertainment. What I have to say now is more sobering-and far more educational. Cassandra, bang." 
    A glowing anthill filled the hall; it brightened as the hall lights dimmed.
    Neon vermilion tunnels, dozens of them. Hundreds of bright green dots chewed at the tips, extending the tunnels, then flowed back up to the trunk of the beast. Cadmann remembered an ant farm his brother had built when both were small. These tunnels had more of a fractal look. Despite irregularities in the topography of this mainland mountain range, the automated widgets were following a plan; you saw a symmetry, large patterns repeated in diminishing scale.
    In the tip of a tunnel, light flared. A conspicuous shock wave, confined, flowed upward to a main trunk. Refining machinery flared red, then pulsed red-black, red-black. 
    The crowd's whispered reaction was immediate, and ugly.
    Linda raised her voice above, the sound of that evil wind. "Something exploded. Not high explosive, something more like gunpowder. How it got down there . . . well. All we know is that the refinery has shut down, and we can't correct the damage from here."
    Toshiro raised a hand. "Couldn't this be any sort of normal equipment failure?"
    Linda said, "Toshiro, these bore collectors are just drills and a bucket for the ore. They run on solar cells and fuel cells, the fuel cells are just high-tech batteries, they can't explode, and there aren't any fuel cells where we're having the problem anyway." 
    "Of course you thought about this before. Sorry." 
    "It's okay. But people, it really was an explosion, and it really did come roaring up from the tip of a bore tube. Cassandra, show us the interference waves."
    Which wasn't a lot of help, Cadmann thought. And there was Mary Ann, delighted, proud of their daughter, and knowing damned well he couldn't read the patterns now flowing across the wall either. Mickey probably could, but he wasn't saying anything.
    Cadmann leaned over to Carlos. "Did you know about this? Anything at all?"
    "News to me, amigo. And I don't like the sound of it." Carlos stood and thrust his hand aggressively into the air. "Request to be recognized." 
    "Sure," Linda said.
    Carlos cleared his throat. "There is a word which hasn't been spoken, but which I sense may be on many minds. The word is sabotage, and there are a thousand reasons to believe that no one here would do such a thing. This is no prank. It's the wrong style. It profits no one and it isn't funny. Before we form any opinions, I assume that arrangements are being made for an on-site inspection?" 
    Linda petted the baby, looked out to her husband for a moment, and nodded. "Why would it be sabotage? How could anyone have put an explosive there? A gnat couldn't get into those tunnels. Of course we'll go look at the machinery. We'll look, and we'll find out it was something weird. Avalon Surprise!"
    Tip of a tunnel. No Merry Prankster could have crawled down a tunnel, Cadmann thought. Too narrow, and the central processing plant was a metal plug massing hundreds of tons. The mine was all nanotechnology; it had been growing in place for seventeen years. The tunnels led to it, not past it.
    Cadmann leaned toward his son. "Mickey? You know mines. Any suggestions?"
    Mickey frowned and shook his head. "Avalon Weird," he muttered, but not loud enough for anyone but Cadmann, to hear.
    As good as any other theory, Cadmann thought. You couldn't even . . . hmm. Cause a bore collector to deposit a charge of dynamite or gunpowder? Acquired how? From the fuel cell dump? A bore collector had been at work when the explosion happened.
    It would have been a hell of a difficult prank. Would it be enough for the Merry Pranksters that it was impossible? There didn't seem to be any other motive. The mine was the colony's mineral source. Why choke that off?
    Joe Sikes limped up to the platform. "Linda's right, it's Avalon Weird. Something else about this planet we don't know. Something that happens on the mainland and not here."
    "And it's time to take the Grendel Scout candidates over to the mainland anyway," Linda finished for him. "I just wanted everyone to see how much trouble this was causing . . . "
    She thinks it's sabotage, Cadmann thought. I guess I do too. "Impossible" is a challenge to the Surf's Up crowd.
    "So what should we do?" someone asked. "Can we fix it?"
    "We have to go look," Linda said. "There's no point in fixing it until we know what happened."
    There's that tone again. She really does believe it's the pranksters. They get their joke and the mainland expedition they want all at once. Linda hates this, and she's talked Joe into leaving it lay. Wonder if that's the right approach?
    It was clear enough that Joe would prefer it was the Pranksters. That would give him the moral high ground. Joe seriously wanted to be an alpha male, particularly now that he'd hooked up with a much younger woman.
    Cadmann would have stopped that marriage if he could. He still wondered what they saw in each other. Because Linda looked very like her mother, and Mary Ann had slept with Joe Sikes before Cadmann staked his claim? Be honest. She reclaimed me from an alcoholic fog. It's her claim on me, not the other way around . . . 
    Old news. Cadmann Weyland's effector nerves didn't extend into other human beings, not even into his daughter. It was a thing he had to relearn constantly. 
    Meanwhile: the bomb.
    It was a difficult prank, but possible. Develop your own nano-beasties. Or drill straight down from the surface to where a convenient bore collector would be in a week, or a month, if you could just work out the damned fractal pattern-
    But it didn't feel right, and Cadmann felt the hairs trying to stand up along his neck and arms. An Avalon Surprise, on the mainland, where there are dragons. Alarum: Linda would go to the mainland with his grandson. She never left Cadzie. Mary Ann had raised her children the same way, with lots of affection and bonding.
    Linda and Joe knew those mines better than anyone, and they had no clue, so what was more probable? This didn't feel like the Pranksters. It was destructive and unfunny. And if not them, than an Avalon Surprise: like the grendels. 
    Mary Ann's hand closed over his. "Penny?" 
    "Bad bargain," he said quietly. "Bad memories. I'm going to be helpless again." 
    "You don't like that feeling, do you?"
    "Being tied to a table with a grendel in my lap. Being tied to this island while my grandson is half a world away." 
    "Go with them."
    "I don't think they want Daddy tagging along." And what he didn't say was: I've had enough, Mary Ann. I don't want any more excitement. I've had all I need for one lifetime. Let someone else deal with the damned dragons.
    And Linda was handling herself beautifully. She was in a spot: she had to admit the possibility of sabotage-but could only admit it to herself. She couldn't let that uncertainty infect the Earth Born. On the other hand, she had to let potential perpetrators know she knew, and hope to God they had enough sense to stop. 
    A fine line, indeed.
    There was another general murmur, and both Jessica and Little Chaka raised their hands.
    "Jessie," Linda said. "You wanted to say something?" 
    Jessica pushed Little Chaka ahead of her, and they both strode onto the stage. Linda and Joe Sikes retired hand in hand to their seats. Chaka strode to the podium and blinked at the crowd. "Cassandra, display my Long Mama Demo, please."
    The screen behind him lit to show the eel struggling up the Amazon, flashed ahead to show it in the glacial pool, then cut to the covered tank where it glared up at the camera. "Our visitor. She's not really an eel, but that's the closest thing Earth evolved to this, a big saltwater eel."
    "Sure startled me!" Jessica said. "Came right into the living room at the Hold."
    Someone guffawed and an adult voice shouted. "Good thing for Long Mama Cadmann wasn't home!" 
    Chaka grinned uncertainly and started over. "I looked at everything Cassandra knows about eels back on Earth," he said. "It isn't really an eel, but it's interesting, eels on Earth go long distances to spawn, and that's what Long Mama was doing, trying to find the headwaters of the Amazon, following instinctive patterns that might be ten or ten thousand generations old." 
    "Not ten thousand," someone shouted.
    Chaka frowned in thought, and Jessica came to join him at the podium. "Probably not ten thousand generations," Jessica said. "I agree, it's likely that anything that carried those genes would have been wiped out by grendels. But we don't know!"
    Chaka had found his voice. "A shorter time argues that the grendels came to the island fairly recently," he said.
    "And makes our point!" Jessica said in triumph. "It's inevitable, really inevitable, the natural ecology of Camelot will come back now that the grendels are gone. Sorry, Chaka."
    He nodded absently. "The natural ecology will come back. Shouldn't we know more about it?"
    "Won't be the same." Edgar Sikes's nasal whine came from the audience. "Can't be."
    "I know, Edgar. We've seeded the island with Earth species," Chaka said. "When they mix, it'll get interesting. But we'd like to guess what any Avalon life-form will do to us."
    "Tell us more about the worm," someone called. An adult voice.
    "Carolyn," Sylvia whispered. "She sounds scared." 
    "I don't blame her," Mary Ann said.
    Chaka didn't seem to notice the fear. He spoke eagerly. "We've only had the eel a few days. And she's just one piece of the pattern! We don't know how she interacts with other life, with climate, with grendels for that matter. We don't know what prompted her to swim upstream now, now when so many other Camelot species are changing their habits. We need to know what the mainland ecology is doing. Are things changing there, too?"
    "And what eats grendels?" A child's voice from the back of the room. Several older children shushed him.
    "Big grendels eat grendels. I've been over there," Joe Sikes said with belligerent pride. "That's your ecology, Chaka. Big grendels, little grendels, grendels that live in snow, water grendels, grendels that build dams, grendels that are dams. Grendels eat grendels, and they deserve each other. There aren't any grendels here, and by God we'll keep it that way, so why do we care how our stupid eel interacts with grendels?" 
    "That's not fair," Jessica said.
    Chaka cleared his throat. He sounded more positive now. "We do have to know, Joe. What you don't know can kill you. If you hadn't known grendels need to cool off . . . ?" 
    There were murmurs of approval from the tables where the Surf's Up crowd sat. Linda nodded and pulled Joe Sikes back into his seat; and Joe didn't resist. You wouldn't have dumped burning kerosene into the Amazon Creek, Chaka hadn't needed to say, to sear the grendels raging through humanity's last refuge.
    "We have to know," Chaka repeated, "and it should be clear there's only one way to find out. We need a full expedition to the mainland. A permanent base there. Not just trips to the highlands, mine inspections. We need a full biological team in place to study the mainland, study it now, before the winds carry Earth species from Camelot to the mainland, because once that happens we'll never know!" 
    "Now just a minute!" Zack Moskowitz half rose. "If it comes to that, we don't have to know-" 
    More murmurs. Cadmann frowned in thought. 
    "Wrong way to talk to the youngsters," Carlos said.
    "We do have to know," Chaka said. Jessica nodded vigorous approval as Little Chaka stood to his full height and let his voice rise. "We must study what is there now, we must understand the natural ecosystem, or we will be caught unprepared. For the past twenty years you have ignored this truth, the truth that it is impossible to live on this planet and hide from it at the same time. I say that this is our world, and we don't know enough about it. It's time we learned." 
    There was loud applause from the Star Born, mostly silence from the First Generation.
    "And we'll need all the resources, here and the mainland," Coleen McAndrews said. Her voice was as serious as a fifteen-year-old's can be. "To go back to the stars!" 
    The audience buzzed like an angry hive. There was no organized back-to-the-stars group, and no real leader, but the issue cut across the generations. No leader yet, Cadmann thought. But when that girl grows up and all that enthusiasm matures we'll have another political fight. Lord, lord, why did we think we left all that behind when we came here?
    Zack Moskowitz rose. He took his place at the second podium, across the stage from Chaka. "I think," Zack said, "that an issue as important as this one should be considered as formally as possible. I propose a debate a week from today-" 
    "No!" Jessica stood, flushing.
    "The chair hasn't recognized you, young lady." 
    "The chair didn't recognize you either, Zack!" 
    "You know that I am the chairman-"
    "Of formal discussions, yes. But this isn't a regular meeting, it's an after-dinner discussion. You can't just run roughshod over it like you do over everything else, Zack. This is too important. Are you declaring an emergency meeting?" 
    "No-" 
    "Then wait for Chaka to recognize you."
    Zack looked to Cadmann for support. The king appeals to the warrior, but the warrior was ignoring him. Zack stifled his protest. "Very well. I will turn the floor back to Chaka. Chaka? May I be recognized?"
    Little Chaka's white teeth gleamed. "Jessica first," he said, "and then you." 
    Zack smiled sourly.
    Jessica took the podium. "The time to decide this is now. We're already taking the Grendel Scouts over, and we've got to send a repair crew as well. It's the right time. Make this the beginning of a permanent base." 
    "For what?" Zack said.
    "For what? To learn about our world," Jessica said. "We need toxological tests, soil tests, we need to know about parasites. The highlands would be perfect for an initial base. That's safe, at least."
    She looked as if she had more to say, but had changed her mind about saying it. "Chaka, can we alter this format?" 
    "Into what form?"
    "Informal debate. Allow Zack to take the opposing view, at your podium. We can then field questions and see if we can come to a consensus this evening."
    Chaka yielded the floor, and Zack took his place, giving Jessica a grudging nod. "May I?" he asked. She inclined her head.
    "May I ask what is the great hurry?" Zack began. "You will shortly visit the mine site. Others will carry out the Grendel Scout rituals. When you've returned we can decide what needs to be done next. Perhaps by then we will know what has gone wrong at the mines. It's probably something natural but surprising. In any event nothing need be done in haste."
    "There you go, being reasonable again," someone shouted.
    Zack shrugged. "I try to be."
    "You wanted to kill the eel," Jessica protested. "That wasn't reasonable!"
    Zack nodded. "Yes it was. The eel was unfamiliar, and we have standing rules formulated by our best experts after discussion. The rules aren't perfect, but they're the best judgments we can make." 
    "And that one is wrong," Jessica insisted.
    "Perhaps. This time it appears to have been wrong. But that doesn't mean all the rules, or even that one, are wrong as a general case. We can't foresee everything." 
    "We don't have to foresee everything," Jessica said.
    "You're talking past each other." Aaron Tragon stood. "I beg your pardon for speaking out of turn, but don't you see it? Governor Moskowitz is concerned that when an unexpected danger appears, we won't be able to decide what to do in time, and while it is unlikely that the delay will destroy the colony, it might. Isn't that it, sir?" 
    "Yes, exactly."
    "But here there is no possible danger to the entire colony," Aaron said. "The people who go to the mainland may be in danger if they are careless, but the colony won't be . . . Actually, to be callous for a moment, if there's something so dangerous on the mainland that the only way to find out about it is to have the entire expedition killed, that knowledge alone is worth the price! It will make the colony safer, not less safe. Wouldn't you agree?"
    Aaron waited a moment, and when Zack didn't answer, nodded politely and took his seat. 
    "Arrogant little snot," Mary Ann said.
    "I thought he was quite reasonable," Cadmann said. 
    "You would."
    "Not that there is that much danger," Jessica was saying. "We've been to the mainland dozens of times now. We even take the children to the highlands. And in all that time, the only dangers have been grendels, and we know how to deal with those." 
    "I'm still worried," Zack said. 
    "Name the danger."
    Zack shook his head. "You know I can't. Call it Avalon Surprise. We couldn't have named grendels, but they were real."
    "But you learned how to fight grendels," Jessica said, "and you taught us. By the way, thank you. From all of us Second-"
    There was a murmur of approval. "Well said," Aaron shouted.
    "But Zack, you knew it would be dangerous before you left Earth," Jessica said. "But you came. You couldn't ask if we wanted to come-" 
    "We did think about that, you know," Zack said.
    "Yes, sir, we learned all that in school," Jessica said. "And we're not sorry you brought us. But it's our world too, and we want to know more about it. Don't we?" 
    Another chorus of young voices in enthusiastic approval.
    "Except I want a shopping mall!" someone shouted. Everyone laughed.
    "And we're learning," Jessica went on. "The eel is important because it's a reminder that we won't always have an artificially simple ecology here. We still don't know when grendels came to this island. We don't even know if these were normal grendels! Maybe they were-" 
    "Supergrendels?" Chaka said. He grinned. 
    "Or stunted, stupid weak grendels," Jessica said.
    "My God," Rachael Moscowitz said. "That's a horrible thought!"
    "So we go find out," Jessica said. "And now's as good a time as any. A highland base with expeditions into the lowlands. Now. This year." 
    A swell of applause, and not only from the Second.
    "Count me out." That too came from where the Second were seated, to be answered by catcalls. "Aww, poor baby-"
    "Who staffs that base?" Zack had lost and knew it. "Who plans this expedition?"
    "We can work that out," Jessica said. She looked meaningfully at Cadmann. "We're not fools, Governor. We want your advice."
    "But not our leadership," Zack said quietly. "That's plain enough."
    "We want that too, unless your leadership means doing nothing without your orders." 
    "We just want you to be safe-"
    "If you wanted to keep us safe, you could have stayed on Earth!"
    Mary Ann stood. Cadmann looked at her in surprise. Mary Ann almost never spoke at meetings.
    She didn't wait to be recognized, but no one said anything. Certainly Jessica wasn't going to interrupt her. "Why do you think it was safe on Earth?" Mary Ann demanded. "It wasn't safe. Not even in the best neighborhoods. You must know that. We brought recordings." 
    "Mom-"
    "It wasn't," Mary Ann said. "You think of Earth as some kind of paradise lost? An Eden? It was a horrible place, where all the education in the world wouldn't save you from losing your job, and there was nowhere you could go without graffiti, and smutty drawings, and criminals, and people demanding handouts and accusing you of being a criminal if you didn't give them something. Where . . . Jessica, it's safe here, really safe, but it wasn't safe on Earth. That's why we came here!" 
    There were murmurs of agreement from the First.
    "Well, Mom, you make Earth sound more dangerous than the mainland."
    "It was," Cadmann muttered. "We forgot that."

    "It's still the end of the debate, amigo," Carlos said. "Jessica still wins." 
    "Yeah," Cadmann said. "And we'll have to plan it." 
    "What you mean 'we,' paleface?"
    "We've got some time, though," Cadmann said. "First they go look at the mines, initiate the Grendel Scouts. Time enough for serious planning when they get back." 
    Jessica thanked the audience and made her way back to her father. She quietly touched his shoulder. "Thanks, Dad. Mom."
    Cadmann put his arms around Mary Ann and Sylvia, drawing them in close. Mary Ann chuckled. "If I know your father, you might be taking that thanks back in a few days. He's going to put you through the wringer." 
    "I wouldn't want it any other way."
    "Jessica-can you and Justin come up for dinner?" Mary Ann brushed a strand of blond hair out of her eyes. "It would be nice to have a family dinner. We've been gone, and you'll be going over to the mainland . . ." 
    "Not tonight," Jessica said apologetically. "This is going to be big news at Surf's Up. I think that I need to be out there tonight."
    Sylvia looked up at Cadmann. "How long do you think it will take to set up a lowland expedition?"
    "Skeeter-based? Scouting out a location? A little preliminary work." He closed his eyes, musing. "Built it around the Robor vehicle. A fairly quick in-and-out. I would say no more than twelve hours, preparing for a much more thorough expedition in maybe a . . . month?"
    Jessica nodded happily. "You're reading my mind, Dad."
    "Plans will be on Cass by tomorrow morning. Okay?"
    "Finestkind."
    The meeting was breaking up. Jessica and her brother headed toward each other, hugged fiercely, and collected in a cluster with some of the other Second. They headed out the door together.
    A hand smacked Cadmann's shoulder, and he turned around to face Aaron Tragon.
    As usual, the sheer size of the young man hit Cadmann, hard. Reminded him of a friend . . . long ago. 
    Ernst. First casualty of the Grendels.
    As such he should have felt a touch of nostalgia, of loss. Ernst had died because Cadmann thought he could handle it. Could handle everything.
    And for a moment it felt as if Cadmann were moving in slow motion, Tragon's glittering, wide smile so intense and intimate that it seemed that the other shapes in the room faded to nothing.
    The full force of Tragon's personality was so strong that Cadmann had to consciously remind himself where he was. Not in the past, but here, in the present, as if he had awakened from a micronap.
    "-you for backing us, Cadmann. Jessica said that we could count on you." 
    His smile was dazzling.
    "I imagine that you'll be going over?" 
    "Wouldn't miss Grendel Scout initiation." 
    "Good," Cadmann said, and meant it.
    "Not that Justin can't take care of the kids," Aaron said carefully. "Well, good night, sir. Thanks again." 
    Aaron turned, but before he could walk away Ruth Moscowitz blocked his path. She stared up at him in admiration. Aaron paused and took her hand. "You look lovely tonight, Ruth." 
    She beamed. "I thought you were just brilliant." 
    He touched her right hand to his lips, winked at her, and strode off to rejoin his coterie. Ruth took her right hand in her left as if she wanted to wrap it in tissue paper. 
    "I think I'm going to be sick," Mary Ann said. 
    Sylvia chuckled. "He's a nice young man. I can understand what Jessica sees in him."
    Mary Ann's smile was ghastly. "Let's get home, Cad. I'd like to build a big fire in the bedroom. Get really toasty. Okay?" 
    "Sure."
    Sylvia unwound herself from his arm, and headed off. "I want to check with Linda on her simulations. I'll be up to the Bluff later, all right?"
    "No problem." The crowd was thinning now. Cadmann took Mary Ann's small hand in his, squeezed it gently. "Things are changing fast now. It had to happen." 
    "I . . . don't want to talk about it just now. Cad. Take me home."


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 6

SURF'S UP

Friendship is Love without his wings! 
-GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON, Hours of Idleness

    Justin brought the skeeter in for a last approach to Surf's Up. He'd skidded through the mountain passes. The land road would have added an extra five minutes to the trip. The thermals coming over the mountains could be a little hairy, but there were beacons in the pass, both visual and radio, so that it was just dangerous enough to be fun. There were unofficial records for three paths through the mountains under varying conditions: on visual, on radio, blind at midnight, fog, storm.
    It kept the lords and ladies of Surf's Up busy, if not out of mischief. It also drove the adults crazy.
    When he called in for landing he didn't just get the usual Cassandra go-ahead. He got an audio channel, and from the background noise, the party had already begun.
    He shot out of the pass at 120 kilometers per hour accelerating all the way, putting him well ahead of the other Seconds racing him back from the colony. Light flooded the beach from a huge flat vidscreen twenty meters square that showed a daylit mountain scene on the mainland. He took the last few meters skewing sideways, shot straight over Surf's Up and out over the ocean, where a little night action was under way.
    Justin had viewed holograms from Hawaii; Malibu, California; Australia; and other places supposed to have the best surf action on Earth. In Justin's expert opinion, Camelot Island beat them all. The water was cool but not cold, the waves rolled forever, and the surfing season lasted all year long.
    Someone was riding his board in with a torch held aloft in one hand . . . no, now that he saw it more clearly, there were three of them, carrying horsemane gum torches that silvered the entire wave crest. Two girls and a guy, and one girl was Katya Martinez, lookin' good.
    Sand whipped in all directions as Justin touched the skeeter down. He dismounted and ran to the open barbecue pit, kicked off his shoes, and did a kind of victory dance, screaming, "We're going over, troops!"
    They howled like mad dogs, and Little Chaka hurled a beer pod. It slapped Justin just above his heart. It stung, but the pod didn't break.
    He grabbed a lady and got a long wet kiss, and then grabbed another one and did it even better, then plopped down in the sand and popped the beer open. 
    Derik Crisp spread big beefy hands. "So?" 
    "So the mining machinery is down. Great timing. They've got to go over." 
    "Great timing." Derik grinned. "So how'd you do it?" 
    "Me? No," Justin protested. "Hey, that'd be real sabotage, nasty stuff."
    "Sure," Derik said. "Sure." He was still grinning, but he read Justin's irritation. "Does this have to be real? Nobody had to blow anything up. Just tell Cassandra to make pictures." 
    Justin said, "I never thought of that. Who could do that?" 
    "Edgar," someone yelled. "Yeah, but he wouldn't." 
    "Depends on what he's offered," Little Chaka said.
    Jessica had come running out of the communications room in time to hear them. "You don't really think it's the computer, do you, Justin? Whoever did it would have to be good, really good, they'd have to fool Linda and Joe-" She cut herself off.
    "Yep," Derik said. "Edgar Sikes could sure as hell do it."
    "And no one else," Jessica said. "Gee, Linda's got enough generation problems without that." She shook her head. "And I saw Linda's files, sure, if anyone can fake it Edgar could have, but I just don't believe it." She looked accusingly at Justin. "The explosions were real; now, how did they happen?" 
    "Sheesh! Why me?"
    "Why Edgar?" Jessica demanded. "Same reason. Who else could it be? Who could have done Mount Tushmore?" 
    "You wrong me," Justin said, but he had trouble hiding the pride in his voice.
    "Aaron," Derik said. "Aaron Tragon could have done it."
    Jessica nodded vigorously, and a lot of Justin's pride faded.
    "I'm going to call them," Derik said suddenly. 
    "Hey now, wait-"
    "No, just to talk to Linda. See if she knows anything." Derik went to put through the call.
    Derik and Linda had been a thing, once, for about ten days. Calling her right now might cause Joe Sikes to shove his phone down his throat. Jessica would have stopped him . . . but others were gathering around them now. "What's the word?" someone called.
    "We're going," Jessica answered. "Not just the chicken run for the candidate Scouts."
    The light from the screen had been a view of the mining site on the mainland. Now it was Linda Weyland standing fourteen meters tail, holding four meters of baby Cadzie under one arm. Jessica couldn't hear her or Derik.
    Aaron Tragon waded out of the water carrying a sand-colored writhing shape. The thing wrestled with him, but he had it by the blades. He dropped it onto the grill and went for a towel.
    The crab struggled as it cooked. It was a Camelot sea crab. They'd found more than twenty variations already, all with a bifurcated shell and four mobile limbs, but-"This one's new," Chaka said.
    "Study it quick," Aaron suggested.
    There would be no rescuing the beast. Chaka knelt above the fire pit, one hand bladed below his eyes to shield them from the heat. He watched the crab move, noting the play of the joints. The crab had two wide fins for swimming, and the shell had expanded into a big aerodynamic plate. The forelimbs were agile little spears now trying to fight the fire. The armored wrist/elbow joints were almost human in their agility.
    "More incoming natives. Those wrists. You can't help wondering if something's waking them all up at once," Chaka said. "I want the shells."
    Another skeeter touched down neatly next to Justin's, and Stu Ellington hopped out. Six more came over the mountains in tight formation. Two carried firewood. One brought food from the main encampment. The others brought passengers, and the party grew until it seemed that the beach would sink under their weight.
    Aaron Tragon strode among them, and slipped one brawny arm around Jessica's waist. "Well, now," he said merrily. "I think we can call that a major victory." 
    "Let's take a look at Dad's plans first," Jessica said. "And then we can decide how much victory we've got." She was about to pull free, reflexively. Justin saw her decide: she leaned back against him. They had been casual lovers for nearly a year now. Casual: Justin had never seen Jessica change a plan to be with Aaron. Or any other man. Sometimes he wondered-
    Justin felt someone kneading his shoulders. He looked around just enough to catch a glimpse of dark hair. Long. Wavy. A face not pretty, but made beautiful by devastating eyes. Eyes to drown in, to die for. Katya. He reached back and grabbed her, pulling her close to him, and craned around to gnaw on her neck.
    She was dripping wet and cold as death, and their torsos touched from ankles to eyebrows. A wave of cold washed through him, and he couldn't seem to control it. It had been a long time, and he was surprised by the strength of his reaction.
    One of the other kids said: "So-who's going over?" 
    Derik turned the volume up and Linda's voice blasted over the beach. "We are! Joe and Cadzie and me, we're going in first."
    Justin, not quite watching Jessica over Katya's shoulder, saw sudden shock instantly swallowed.
    They'd spoken once, when an older friend was seven months pregnant, and Jessica had remembered this-
    The adults around her were half a dozen fully pregnant women, her mother included. Jessica had been five or six, pretending to play, but listening. And the women must have been locked in a dominance game, detailing their prenatal discomfiture. Little Jessica had listened in awe and horror, stupefied by the realization that she would one day be slow, and fat, and vulnerable just like the big ones, the adults . . .
    Funny she'd remembered at all. Maybe it had happened only in Jessica's imagination. It was a story she'd told Justin when she was twelve, when an older friend was pregnant. For an instant, now, Justin saw Linda as her sister did. Trapped.
    The baby Cadzie was holding her prisoner. Before his birth she was already imprisoned, heavy and slow. Now she couldn't even attend a beach party. Now she was burdened by what Cadzie needed: milk, diapers, the cobalt blue blanket, the bassinet, the conversations that wouldn't happen because everyone wanted to talk about the baby instead: the distractions.
    A cacophony of voices was rising. "I want to go." "Me too." "Hey, who's better at making a camp than me?" 
    "Room for a lot of us," Justin said. "We can take, what, twenty Scouts and fifteen Seconds. And the candidates, but they come back with Linda and Joe, but still, we could really do it up right. Set up primary base on the Mesa, and a secondary down at Heorot. Do a little . . . fishing." 
    Jessica got into the spirit of it instantly. "Take two of the skeeters and survey--"
    "Get the initial surveys from orbit. Let Dad spot two or three likely areas--"
    Aaron was into it now. "Listen-we only need three skeeters to move the blimp, but four is safer. We can set up crisscrossing fire zones for the one that touches down." 
    "Touches down?"
    "Plants, soil samples, plant some seismic detectors, hell, we can do some serious work!"
    Aaron swept Jessica up in his arms and smooched. When he set her down she gave him her very smokiest gaze, linked her arms around his neck, and drew him close for some very serious kissing, her hips rolling against him in a clear "all systems go" alert. Justin couldn't seem to look away. When they broke, she reached out and licked the underside of Aaron's upper lip. Onlookers might as well have been on Isenstine.
    Aaron turned and leered at the rest of them. " 'Scuse us," he said. His great, corded arms lined around her waist. He exhaled and lifted her onto his shoulders so that her belly button was inches from his nose.
    Jessica giggled "Don't you dare bite-" and then uttered a shocked and somewhat dreamy "Oh!!?" as he began walking backward to his hut.
    With a brief and bleary cheer, the rest of them returned to their party.
    There was something in Justin that felt . . . out of place. He walked down to the water's edge and stood alone to watch the moonglade dancing in the surf. Aaron was brilliant, handsome, athletic. And wrong for Jessica. He was sure of that, utterly certain, but for no reason he knew. It was just wrong-somehow. Justin didn't much appreciate the thoughts and feelings nipping around the edges of his mind.
    Katya came up behind him and slipped her arms around his waist. "What're you thinking?"
    North of them, two days across a warm gray sea, was the continent. He hoped it was far enough away. He wanted to be with Jessica, but if she and Aaron were going to be together . . . maybe it wouldn't be such a good idea for him to be there.
    He could hardly tell Katya-
    "What if," she said, her sharp little teeth gnawing at his ear, "I took you back to my hut, and made violent love to you?"
    "I'd consider that a right friendly thing to do," he said. A file flashed through his mind, all of Katya's preferences and pungencies, all of the ways she moved and whispered, her small guidances and encouragements and the many happy little bits of erotic filigree she superimposed upon a very basic act.
    He hadn't really made up his mind, but she'd gone a good distance toward making it up for him. She took his hand and led it along a row of wooden huts built back from the waterline. They were lashed together with rope and stilted against the seasonal rising of the tides.
    The wood was a bamboo-like shoot transplanted from south of Isenstine a decade before. The south had less direct access to water-and therefore grendels hadn't razed it so thoroughly. The bamboo-like shoots were delicious for their first two years, and then hardened into something light and strong, almost ideal for building of houses or boats. The second-to-last house in the row was Katya's. She held the door open and beckoned him in.
    Social interactions were an ongoing experiment on Avalon. Pregnancy was no issue: all children were welcome. Those who chose not to become pregnant could do so with near hundred-percent certainty, and if they missed, the fetuses could be removed to an artificial womb more safely and painlessly than any therapeutic abortion in the twentieth century. So Cassandra had told them; but it had never been tested. The social pressure to have children was high, and so far every girl who became pregnant had become a mother.
    There was no venereal disease. Those life-forms had been left behind on Earth. The threats that had shaped human sexual mores for much longer than human history were missing on Avalon. In a very real sense, all Avalon was one family.
    There in the shadowed confines of Katya's shack, she stripped off her clothes and stood, naked, challenging Justin with the cant of her hips. Her black hair fell softly to the tips of her shoulders. Her body was full, and ripe, and lovely.
    Moonlight slanted in through the blinds, throwing bars across her as she walked to him. With many little kisses and whispered endearments, she began the process of seduction. 
    Jessica . . .
    The thought flitted across his mind, then was gone. A sudden fierceness took him. He gathered her up in one arm and flung her back upon her bed, a pile of undulating artificial fur that purred as their weight sank upon it.
    Distantly came the roar of the surf. Wave crests scattered the light of a single full moon, and bathed their bodies in pale light as they made love . . . or something like love . . . on that bed.
    And as he threw his head back, panting as Katya's fingers kneaded his flesh, he stared mindlessly at the window. The moon was adrift. That was Nimue, the smaller, closer moon. You could tell time by Merlin; it crossed the sky every six days. Nimue moved too fast for telling time.
    The moon looked back at him and it wasn't quite round. It wasn't the moon that Justin's distant ancestors bayed at, beating drums and singing songs, holding their newborn infants high to bathe in its light, for a thousand generations before the birth of civilization. Although it was the only sky he had ever seen . . . 
    It was alien to him.
    There is a rhythm between human beings, as well. As steady and strong as a heartbeat is the rhythm that men and women find with one another.
    And in a social service so willingly and pleasurably provided, in this brief mingling of flesh and fluids, this joining of warm moist membranes in the service of health and convenience . . .
    There is a moment, near the peak of it all, when logic falls away, and breath grows sharp, when the eyes meet, and you can see through each other, through all the little social barriers . . .
    Down, down to the place where a bit of hindbrain still thinks that this is about something. 
    Isn't this about making babies, it whispers.
    Isn't this the continuation of life? And aren't children vulnerable things, helpless before the cold and the predators? And isn't this act really about the rest of your life? And your children's lives? And your children's children's . . . ?
    Isn't there a part, a place, a tiny, lone voice somewhere deep inside that asks if this couldn't, shouldn't, can't mean something more? That looks into the eyes of each and every partner, and asks, in its own way . . .
    Are you the one?

    "Carolyn was taking care of me, not Mom. Mom wouldn't let anyone touch her. I saw her stop crying, and then she toppled out of the chair. A bunch of the grown-ups picked her up and ran her into the hospital, and I don't know what happened after that." Katya stirred in his arms. "I wasn't alone after that. They moved me right into Dad's place." 
    "I spent a lot of time there too." 
    "I remember."
    "You were hell's wrath with a grendel gun." She'd beaten him in the exercises, Justin remembered. "Did Carlos start you early?" 
    She laughed. "Yeah."
    "That outhouse we all built when we were, what, twelve?" 
    "About then. Geometry lessons," Katya said.
    "Don't remember what we had in school that year, but that's how I learned carpentry. Katya, I must be slow of thought. Why did anyone want a classic outhouse?" 
    "Hendrick took a skeeter and lofted it to a peak in the mountains. Coffee pickers use it. There's not another outhouse in the universe with a view like that." 
    "What did it feel like? I grew up with two mothers-" 
    "I had a great many," Katya murmured. "Not just Dad's guests. Mary Ann and Sylvia, Carolyn, Rachael Moskowitz. Dad would skeeter off to find special rock, wood, crystals, bones; or he didn't want me underneath when he was welding. It must have been like that for the Bottle Babies, don't you think?" 
    "You're not like them."
    "No." Katya shuddered. Why did she do that? But her drowsy voice trailed off.
    He turned onto his side. She snuggled up behind him, his buttocks tucked against the furred thatch of her groin, her hand reaching around to cup the recent instrument of her pleasure.
    They had never spoken of a future together.
    The moon was looking Justin in the face. Not Man's moon. He listened to the surf. His surf, but not his ancestors'. Shorter, quicker waves striking with more force in the stronger gravity . . .
    But moon and surf belonged to his children, and his children's children, for generations to come.
    The act of love so recently performed there, in that bed, carried its own rhythm, born in the eternal search for the Now. The search to end the lonely "I." The endless search, conducted eternally, by every human being, throughout each isolated lifetime.
    That rhythm was perhaps the only thing born of earth remaining to them. And when those rhythms changed to match the moons and tides of Avalon . . . 
    As perhaps they had already begun to do . . . 
    What then would remain of them?
    Jessica . . . he thought one last time. Before his thoughts devolved to mist, and sleep claimed him.

    When Justin woke, Katya was gone. He could hear sounds of construction on the beach. He showered in cold water, pulled his pants on, and wandered out.
    The vast Chinese-dragon shape of Robor was undergoing a full diagnostic over the Surf's Up beach. The hundreds of separate, flame-and heatproof hydrogen pods providing her lift were individually listed for leaks, and superstructure was inspected . . .
    Robor was as large as a football field and as tall as a twelve-story building, the largest vehicle on Avalon. He could lift forty tons of cargo. The Minerva shuttles could land anywhere near a water source (although the discovery of Grendels had made that a nervous proposition), and also travel to orbit. The skeeters had more versatility and speed and maneuverability, but minuscule range. Only Robor could travel to the mainland and bring back the booty.
    Robor was constructed mostly of molded plastics. The satellites that originally surveyed Avalon had revealed oil in large quantities. When Geographic took its hundred-year jaunt across the sky at one-tenth light speed, she brought with her three prefabricated factories to manufacture the kind of high-tensile plastics that only zero-gee processing made possible.
    Robor had no independent motors. Instead, three skeeters were anchored to the upper frame in triangular formation, and hooked into the dirigible's main bank of batteries and Begley-cloth solar collectors. Their engines became Robor's engines.
    Robor was a favorite target of the Merry Pranksters. He had been painted with huge cartoon-whale eyes, been transformed into a gargantuan eighteenth-century Venetian gondola, and had once been transformed by a half ton of lightweight building foam into a remarkably lifelike phallus. When Little Chaka pointed out that Robor couldn't lift in that state, the decorations disappeared quick, but the dirigible's pronoun remained he.
    His most recent incarnation was more innocuous, colorful . . . and oddly appropriate.
    In red and green and electric blue, with snaky white mustache and huge, crimson-lipped leer, Robor was currently the living image of a Ming-dynasty dragon god.
    The dragon hovered above the colony of Surf's Up, and in his shadow a working celebration of a kind was under way.
    Justin spotted Cadmann's broad shoulders and graying hair through the crowd, and sought him out.
    "Morning, father figure." He grinned. They shared a hug. "I wasn't expecting to see you."
    "We're putting a rush on it. I think the eel in the Amazon and the bomb in the mine shook some of us up just because they came so close together. Inquiring minds want to know. Like, why now?"
    "Just a moment, Dad." Justin shouted to Toshiro Tanaka. "Hey, Toshiro-san, can you go over this checklist and make sure we're not forgetting something? Thanks, owe you one. Dad, what's the report from Geographic?"
    "Weather's fine," Cadmann said. "They're doing a critter check on the highlands and Xanadu, nothing so far. I take it you're going on this trip?"
    "Sure, I'm in charge of the candidate Scouts-after all, their overnighter was kind of disrupted by all of this." 
    Justin led Cadmann to the main hall. Surf's Up's meeting hall was a 1960s Hollywood set decorator's fantasy of a South Seas beach hut, built of thornwood and foamed plastic struts. The roof would have been convincing, but the fronds were all from one mold, all identical.
    Cadmann spread a roll of paper out on the table. "I think better on paper," he said, but he had computer files as well. "Cassandra, give me last night's notes, construction mode, freelance."
    He spread out the paper. "Here," he pointed, "is the mainland. Eight hundred miles from here, and a good two days by Robor. You'll have some decent wind behind you. Coming back will be slower, but you can charge up off the mine's collectors." 
    "We'll hook up for recharging as soon as we land." 
    A small crowd had gathered to listen. Aaron slipped through the press. When he stood beside Cadmann they were almost exactly shoulder to shoulder. Aaron was larger, but time has a tempering effect available from no other source. Aaron Tragon might be a Cadmann Weyland one day. He wasn't yet.
    "Yes, there's plenty of charge," Linda said from the door. "The mine hasn't used any for a while. Hi, Dad." 
    Cadmann looked a little startled. "You certainly made good time," he said.
    She colored a little. "Take after my dad, I guess." 
    Justin grinned to himself. Stu Ellington held the record for speed through that pass. She'd have been taking it easy with Cadzie aboard. Justin had already put money on her for the next Landing Day race.
    Little Cad was nursing, or sleeping, or both. The cloth covering Linda's bosom made it difficult to tell which. "Dad, we've found two more maybe-type explosions in the mine record." 
    "Grendel guano! Are the dates significant?" 
    She stared. Cadmann said, "I meant, did they happen when someone might have wanted-skip it. Tell me more." 
    "Recent explosions, twenty weeks ago and fourteen. Low energy, like gunpowder again, way tamer than dynamite. But they didn't happen where boring was going on, they happened in the secondary processors. That machinery is very forgiving, and it just went on chugging." 
    Cadmann thought carefully. If sabotage, then . . . test explosions before the real thing? But the real thing had been something quite different. "Got any ideas, small bright one?"
    "Some defect in the thermal unit at the secondary processor. Some contamination in the coal itself? There's a mushy look to one of the spikes, like . . . less like a single grenade than a bushel of cherry bombs." 
    "Coal dust?" someone said from the door.
    She shook her head. "Coal dust can explode, but we thought of that in the design. If air is mixing with the dust there' d have to be something wrong in the machinery, something Cassandra doesn't see. Even something deliberate." 
    "Sabotage?" 
    She shrugged.
    "Have you done a spectroscopic on the coal?" 
    "Yes, of course, months ago-" 
    "No, I mean recent."
    "Joe says we can't, the instrumentation is gone. We've got to go there."
    "I was thinking dynamite at the bit, but what if air was getting in?" Cadmann was looking about him, not obviously, trying to read faces.
    "Possible, but tricky. We'll look when we get there," Linda said.
    "All right. Bluff Two. Good moorage for Robor, and it's the right place for the Scouts. Make it the base, and we'll check the other mine areas by skeeter." 
    "What about the lowlands expeditions. Dad?" 
    "Remember, this is a dry run. Take three days, check everything, do your overnight with the Scouts, then you can look for a good place for a base camp. Stay alert, and pull back fast if anything unexpected crops up." 
    "Reconnaissance in force," Linda said.
    Cadmann grinned faintly. His fingers moved across the map. "Once you're through with the Scout stuff, you can do geology with one skeeter and use another for mapping. While you do that, the Grendel Scouts stay on the Mesa with somebody steady in charge. Usual rules there. Stay high, no lowlands at all. Any variation from this order will be cause for mainland privileges to be revoked. Do we understand each other?"
    For a moment Justin wondered if Aaron would give an argument, or say something provocative-he had been known to do that. But he wanted this trip too badly. Justin could almost see him sitting on his emotions, holding his tongue for dear life. Instead of smart-mouthing, he nodded.
    Linda sighed. "I'm sure that whatever is wrong, we can handle it. Nothing to worry about. Otherwise," she said, "I'd never take Cadzie with us. Never in a thousand years."


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 7

THE MAINLAND

Its horror and its beauty are divine.
-PERCY BYSSHE SHELLY, The "Medusa" of Leonardo da Vinci

    "Can we talk?"
    Linda looked up with faint annoyance. Linda had learned what all mothers learn. Sleep when the baby sleeps, stupid! She'd just got Cadzie down for a nap. 
    "Please."
    Edgar looked desperate. Joe had been worried about him lately, worried that Edgar had problems he wouldn't talk about. Joe would want to know. She sighed and pointed to the sleeping baby. "In your work room, then. Cassie, Cadzie is asleep. Listen for Cadzie. We will be in Edgar's workroom. Call if he wakes up." 
    "Understood, Linda," Cassandra said softly. 
    Edgar led the way. "Coffee?"
    "Sure, thanks," she said. "I like coffee and I never get a chance to go pick beans."
    Edgar gave her an evil grin. "There's one way you can get all the coffee you ever want." 
    "I used to do that," she said. 
    "Hey, I didn't mean anything."
    "All right." She sipped coffee. "I do like this stuff. Okay, Edgar, what's so urgent it can't wait for me to get a nap while Cadzie's asleep?" 
    "Why don't I get laid?" 
    "What?" 
    He couldn't meet her eyes now. "It's hard enough asking once, let alone twice. Why can't I get laid? I must be the oldest virgin on this planet."
    "You're not a virgin. You're a Grendel Scout. I was there. Trish Chance, the Bottle Baby."
    "Close enough," Edgar said. "There was that once on the mainland. I didn't know what to do. Trish had to show me, and she hardly speaks to me now." 
    "Why ask me?"
    He sighed and shook his head. "There was a time when I'd have given anything I had to sleep with you. You know that."
    She struggled to avoid laughing, and lost. "I'm sorry," she giggled. "But Edgar, I never knew--"
    "You knew," he said. "Come on, I don't know much about girls, but anybody could tell you were keeping score, making sure that anybody you hadn't made it with sure wanted to. You--unless I'm psychotic. Linda?" 
    "All right, I suppose I did," Linda said. "And then one morning I woke up tired of the games."
    Edgar nodded, relaxing a little. "You slept with damn near everybody! Everybody but me. I figured what the hell, eventually you'd get to me just for the record. But you never did. I guess you got pregnant first." 
    "Pregnant and tired," Linda said.
    "So I'd wait till you had the baby, and then I'd have a chance, but that didn't work because now you're my stepmother! Near enough, anyway."
    Tired, and pregnant, and lonely, which didn't make sense because I could have awakened with anyone I wanted, but--"Let's just say I had a lot of friends."
    If he'd been a dog, Edgar's tail would have wagged. "I've read a bunch of different names that people used to use. Hooker. Town pump. Round heels." 
    "Round heels?"
    He laughed. "Falls over easily on her back. And hooker, I read about that one. There was a Union general. Fighting Joe Hooker, who had so many shady ladies following him that people called them Hooker's battalion--" 
    "Thank you for the lecture, but that's quite enough." She stopped, and thought for a moment. "But come to think of it, Joe knows those words, too. He'd never use them, but he knows them."
    "Yeah, Wow, I never would have thought of that. Has he--?" 
    "Never."
    "Anyway, it never happened with us. Or anyone. It's that way with all the girls. Some of them are friends, but none of them want to sleep with me, and it's driving me nuts. Why?"
    "You're too eager, for starts," Linda said. "And you have a talent for lecturing on the wrong subjects." 
    "I tried being hard to get. That doesn't work either." 
    "No, of course not. I mean--"
    He looked down at himself with a sour expression. "Yeah. I know what you mean." 
    "Then why ask?"
    Edgar looked at himself. "I'm fat. I've been taking lessons from Toshiro--"
    "It shows," Linda said. "More muscle tone. Better posture. Lose some weight and you'll look good. Edgar, I'd sleep with you now. I mean, I won't, but I would if I were doing that sort of thing now." 
    "You mean that?" 
    " . . . Yes." 
    "You sound surprised."
    She smiled. "Tell the truth, I am surprised. I hadn't thought about it until you asked me."
    "So why now, and not back when you could? You're just saying it?"
    "No, I'm not just saying it. Edgar, you really are attractive, but it takes work to see that." She frowned. "You make us work at it. I guess I mean, there's something about you that drives girls, maybe not just girls, everyone away, until they get to know you, so there has to be a reason to get to know you. I had one, I'm in love with your father and he loves you, so I worked at it, but after a while it wasn't work."
    Edgar shook his head. It was hard to read his expression in the dim light from the viewscreens. Edgar usually kept the lights low in the rooms he worked in. "My old man doesn't love me. And I don't know what you mean--" 
    "He does too. Edgar, you're always testing people. Him most of all. You want to see just how much we'll put up with. Most of us won't put up with much. Why should we? But Joe does, and I had to, and you know, after a while you stopped doing it so much to me, and then I really got to know you, and you're really a pretty neat guy, somewhere down in there. Keep it up with Toshiro, and pay some attention to yourself in the mirror, and you'll look like one, too. And then you'll get all the girls you want." 
    "Maybe," he said, but he sounded happy.
    And how much of that did I mean? But if he believes it, it might even happen that way. She was trying to think what else she could tell him--
    "Linda," Edgar said. "About your kid's father." 
    "It's not your problem," she said automatically. 
    "No, but it's yours, isn't it?" 
    "I--what do you mean?"
    "You don't know who the father is, and you're afraid to find out, because you think it's somebody you don't like." 
    "Edgar, that's a horrid thing to say. Maybe I don't like you after all." 
    "Linda, do you want to know who the father is?" 
    "You mean you know?" 
    He shook his head. "No, but I could find out." 
    "How?"
    "Cassie knows the blood types of everyone in this colony, including the babies. She has to. Someone might need a transfusion."
    "But Cadzie is 0 positive," Linda said. "So am I. That rules out some boys, but it leaves at least a dozen--" She saw his grin. "Yeah, I wondered. A weak moment." 
    "Linda, you didn't look at the minor factors. There's a lot more to blood types than the majors--"
    "I know about MN factors," Linda said. "And that still leaves a dozen." 
    "You sure got around." 
    "I used to be proud of it," Linda said. 
    "Sure put one in the colonel's eye." 
    "I guess there was some of that in it," Linda said, "And showing him there was something I could do really well--" 
    "Why'd you stop?" He looked around, then back at her. "Yeah, yeah. Dad knows the ancient magical words that turn a lady into a wench. It's still a good question." 
    "I stopped because I didn't like myself anymore," she said. "And now it really is none of your business, and before you ask, no. I'm not going to sleep with you." 
    "I don't want you to. I mean--" He froze up for a moment, then forced words out. "Dad would--He wouldn't kill us, but he'd think he should. Am I right? Anyway, let's just keep it simple, because I really do like you, and I guess I like my old man, and he's so much more, since you, him and you--" Edgar stopped and took a deep breath. "Linda. If you want to know who the father is, I can find out. Cassie has more than blood samples to work with. She already knows, you know." 
    "She does not. I asked her." 
    "You didn't ask in the right way," Edgar said. 
    "What is the right way?"
    He shook his head. "I too know the ancient magical words. I can find out. I can keep anyone else from finding out, too. Anyone but the colonel, or Zack; they can override anything I put in if they know my block's there." 
    "Joe thought you could do something like that. You locked him out of some of your files, didn't you?" 
    Edgar didn't answer at first. "Privacy is a right--" 
    "When you were eleven years old?" 
    "Well, yes, dammit! What's age got to do with it?" 
    She smiled. "Not a lot."
    "So do you want to know? I can stop anywhere," he said. "File accesses are easy to track, anyone can do it, and you spent a lot of time looking into blood typing and paternity and estral cycles just after Cadzie was born." 
    "Oh. Edgar, sometimes you scare me." 
    "Just sometimes?" 
    "Yes, just sometimes. Let me think about this, okay?" 
    "Are you worried about who it is? Look, would you like me to cover your tracks so no one else can find out you were interested?"
    "Oh my God, I never thought--Edgar, if someone else was--tracking my file accesses--would you know?" 
    "Yes. Especially if he asked me to do it for him." 
    "Did--who asked you?"
    "Aaron. Hey, it's all right, I didn't tell him anything!" He studied her. "You think it was Aaron, don't you? You were together a lot last year. Like him and your sister now." 
    She didn't say anything.
    "Why don't you like him?" Edgar demanded. 
    "Why do you hate him?" 
    "I don't hate him. I'm scared of him," Edgar said. 
    "So am I. So. Why?"
    Edgar bent over as if to touch his toes. "Pretty good," he said. "Toshiro's a miracle worker. You know what Aaron did to my back." 
    "Edgar, Joe says you fell out of a horsemane!" 
    "I did," Edgar said. "It was a long time ago, when we were eleven, Aaron was living here then. Dad thought the Bottle Babies ought to have some family stability. He was even thinking of adopting Aaron." 
    "You must have liked that!"
    "Actually I didn't hate it as much as you'd think. Not at first. Dad was pretty rough on Aaron. Said he had to teach him some manners, just like I had to learn. It was sort of fun watching Aaron have to go through that . . ." He glanced down at the computer consoles. "Cadzie's sleeping fine," he said. 
    She waited.
    "So one day we went for a hike, just Aaron and me. You know Strumbleberry? High and dry, with horsemane trees on top. We camped up there overnight. Next morning we saw a pterodon dive into the topknot and come out. Aaron climbed up to see what was up there. He came down. Panting. Said he could beat me to the top.
    "Aaron was ten and I was eleven, but he could generally beat me at anything. But he'd just tired himself out. So I said 'You're on!' and slapped his ass and swarmed up that tree. Near the top I looked and he was right below me, but I knew I could beat him.
    "I pulled myself into that mass at the top and something snapped at my eyes, a claw big enough to take my head off. I reared back and half a dozen claws like big scissors were trying to take my face off, and then there wasn't anything under me. Next thing I knew I was falling. And I remember the look on Aaron's face as I dropped past him.
    "I landed flat on my back. I couldn't move anything below my arms. It hurt like I was dying. It felt like I was killing myself to fish out my comm-link card. I was sure it would be broken, but it wasn't--" 
    "Edgar! Aaron didn't call?"
    "He called. He called after I did. Maybe he would have anyway. Maybe. But he didn't until I got mine out and called for Dad." 
    "Jesus. That's awful. But you never told anyone." 
    Edgar said, "I told Dad. I don't know if he believed me." 
    "I think he did. He doesn't like Aaron," Linda said.
    "So I spent a couple of years recovering. Missed out on growing up with the rest of you. Damn near missed out on getting into the Grendel Scouts. It was me who nailed down what's wrong with the Earth Born. And now I can't get laid." 
    "And you blame that on Aaron?" 
    "Shouldn't I? Why are you afraid of him?" 
    She shook her head. "I don't know. He reminds me of my father, and that ought to be good. I'm not afraid of Dad, but--Edgar, I don't know. Let's leave it at that." 
    "Sure. And you're afraid Aaron's the father," Edgar said. "So you don't want to know." 
    "I didn't say that."
    "No, you didn't say that."
    "Edgar, has Aaron--has he been tracking my computer accesses?"
    She was getting to know that grin. Edgar said, "Linda, he's tried, but he hasn't been able to, because I blocked access to those files, only it doesn't look like I did it, it looks like it was the colonel."
    "That was a nice thing to do. You say he has tried to--to track my file accesses? And asked you to help?" 
    Edgar nodded. "I told him I didn't have time just then. Then he tried on his own, but I'd been there first."
    "Thank you." She stood. "I think I better go look at Cadzie, and we've got to get ready to go to the mines. Let me think about this. Maybe it really is time to find out, whatever the answer is. Thank you."
    His answering smile caught her turning. His proud smile. "Wups. Edgar?" 
    "Yeah?"
    "I've got your attention now? You listen. You think about what I'm saying. You even work out ways to do things for me." 
    Edgar grinned. "Yes, Mom."
    "Edgar, I can remember you losing interest in the middle of saying hello! We used to talk about it, the way you'd get bored and walk off in the middle of something. You'd be off into something else with someone else, programming, going back to the stars, what's with Earth, mainland ecology. Remember that T-shirt?"
    Edgar remembered. Linda had cut a scarlet T-shirt to ribbons, so that it fell like lace across her body, dropping to her upper thighs, concealing and revealing.
    She was watching him. "Got your attention, did it? I just had to know I could."
    How would Dad answer? Edgar said, "I hope you sent that to Medical when you were through with it. Useful for restarting a stopped heart."
    "Edgar, is there a girl you could do something for? Something nobody else has thought of?"
    His face went slack. She remembered that look: Edgar, withdrawing into his own mind. "Maybe . . . I see what you mean, anyway. Linda? Thanks."

    Justin stopped short of Robor's top foredeck. The whiff of coffee was faint, but it touched his brain from underneath. It came to Justin that Aaron Tragon was ruining the smell of coffee for him.
    Before the grendels came, before the First seeded the rivers with trout and catfish, the First had scattered coffee beans over the mountain ridges. Coffee was easy to grow. It was a bitch to harvest. Coffee kept the First healthy! They had to hike into the mountains with backpacks or do without. They'd come back with as much as they wanted, plus a little more for trading. That was why Carlos always had coffee, because someone always wanted a table or bureau or carved doorway.
    Aaron always had coffee because he sent someone to get it. Justin had done that when he was younger. The backpack groups always had fun, but they carried back smoked bear meat once instead of coffee, on Justin's suggestion. He hadn't gone again.
    There was an inner circle at Surf's Up: the coffee drinkers. Some were addicted. Trish and Derik and (oddly) Ruth Moskowitz, and maybe even Jessica, didn't like the taste. They sipped; they made a cup last all night. If you weren't in you were out.
    Justin had dropped out. Others haunted the fringes, trying to find lives, but always ready to display a cup of coffee.
    Coffee smelled like dominance games. Justin was beginning to flinch at it.
    Aaron squeezed his shoulder and slipped past him, and Justin realized he was blocking a door. He shrugged and followed.

    The hum of the skeeters could be felt through the floor of Robor, but even more clearly through the Plexiglas windows at the bow. Jessica stood just behind several of the Scouts. They crowded against the windows, and fought for a place at the front. Palms and faces pressed against the Plexiglas. Morning mist shrouded the sea below them. The loom at the eastern horizon was more blue than the rosy-fingered dawn images of Earth poetry.
    They expected landfall about dawn, and the candidate Scouts had been awakened early for their first look--real sight, not virtual--of the mainland they'd heard about all their lives.
    She sipped her coffee from a hand-fired cup sculpted with a grendel tail as handle. This wasn't the instant stuff that her parents had drunk for the first ten years on Avalon. Coffee took some getting used to. The first beans had been harvested and ground, the first cups served, when she was just nine years old. She still remembered Cadmann's expression as he took the first sip, as if a rare and delicate mystery had suddenly been revealed to him. And her own first bitter sip, which she had spit out into the saucer. 
    Aaron had persuaded her to try it again, years later.
    She felt large, strong hands clasping her shoulders, and shivered a little at the touch. Those hands were so strong and so gentle, when they wanted to be. They were always commanding, but usually gentle as well. She kissed the fingertips, and said, "G'moming, Aaron. Sleep well?" 
    "Like a baby," he said. He picked up a broad-based conical cup and sipped as he peered out into the mist. The foredeck, one of the two upper above the cargo hold, was crafted of polished waxwood. This dark, smooth timber was one of the odd strains to be found south of the Isenstine. Carlos considered it a finer grain than teak, and thought that they could get a good trade going with Earth . . . if Earth was still there, he had added soberly.
    A gust rolled Robor to port. The guidance computer noticed and the skeeter engines made their correction. The ship righted quickly, but the Grendel Biters ooh'd and ahh'd and pretended to lurch this way and that.
    "Look," Aaron said, squeezing her shoulder. "Sunrise." 
    It wasn't, really. It was a false dawn, the first rosy blush of Tau Ceti along the eastern horizon. The glow would fade, then minutes later grow stronger, leading into the light of day.
    Some of the other Second were in the lounge, and the rest of the Grendel Scouts were pouring in. The window was floor to ceiling and wall to wall, curving slightly outward, made of plastic strong enough to take an elephant's charge. The kids could lean against it all they wanted.
    Jessica undogged a deck chair and moved it closer. "Sit a spell."
    "Sure." Aaron dogged the chair to the deck. He sprawled out, relaxed.
    Jessica watched him lazily. He was so relaxed about everything that he did, and so totally committed at the same time. If he sat, he was . . . just sitting. If he spoke before an audience, he was just speaking. If he climbed or surfed, he was just climbing or surfing. And if he was making love, he was doing that and nothing else. It was a relief. Every part of him seemed congruent with the others. Unfragmented. Whole. And when he wanted something? But that kind of ruthlessness was natural to someone so purposeful.
    Was she in love with him? She wondered that herself, and hoped that the answer was yes. Her hand stole into his, and he clasped it.
    A sliver of Tau Ceti had crept above the horizon now, and the reflected radiance pierced the mainland's cloud cover. The clouds were blue-black atop and silver beneath. All the passengers were awake now. Nobody wanted to miss the first general outing in over a year, and for most of the Grendel Scouts this was their first trip ever.
    Justin brought up a chair and dogged it down. "How many candidates do you think we have?" 
    "For a chicken run?" 
    He nodded.
    "Six are old enough." 
    "Think we can find a grendel for them?"
    Nasty chuckle. "Not one for each, but we can sure run a lottery."
    "Extra safety, okay? Lay an extra rifle on," Aaron said thoughtfully. Jessica examined him. Aaron Tragon was not usually the man who spoke for caution. 
    "Why?"
    "Nothing goes wrong. Not now. We're about to get everything that we want." Unspoken: a permanent base on the mainland, manned by the Second. The beginning of a new colony.
    Even more unspoken: the real colony. If Aaron had his way, he would lead that colony. He would set the artificial wombs aboard Geographic pumping out a hundred children a month, and found a nation before he died. He would make the original landing little more than a footnote in the history of Avalon.
    And why not? They were here to conquer a world.
    The clouds were shot through with gold and silver now, and the mist was beginning to burn away. On the horizon, perhaps twenty miles distant, was the mainland. The pilots had timed it beautifully. The Scouts began to applaud and hoot and stamp their feet.
    The mainland was green and lush. The mist seemed almost to change color there ahead of them, coiling and snaking around the bay that opened before them. They watched the water--dark gray foaming to blue, waves rolling in toward a rocky coastline broken by irregular reefs. The mist was heavy, oily, oozed from the ground like smoke and hovered close to it.
    Jessica's heartbeat sped up, and a light sour sensation of pleasure begin to boil in her stomach. This was only her sixth trip to the mainland.
    The observation deck was getting crowded now. Carey Lou had drawn breakfast lots the night before. He served her a tray of scrambled eggs and sliced fruit. Jessica sipped and chewed and sighed, and felt that all was right with the world.
    One of the first things that anyone noticed about the mainland was that it was more lush by far than Camelot Island . . . as if all the grendels had disappeared, but of course they hadn't. Still, farther north on the vast prairie they called the Scribeveldt, Geographic had seen beasts large enough to give a grendel pause. Geographic's cameras showed tracks tens of kilometers long, pale lines scrawled across the vast green-brown prairie. They crossed and curved elegantly, as if some entity were trying to write messages for the stars. It was natural to call the entities Scribes, though seen from orbit they were only squarish blobs at the track endpoints, prairie-colored and nearly featureless. Scribes had to be herbivorous, but everything beyond that was speculation.
    There was a forest at the edge of the Scribeveldt, and sometimes Cassandra saw, or thought she saw, fairly large animals in herds. No one had ever seen a herd of grendels, and the only thing that ate grendels was other grendels. Robor rose to cross a ridge of splintered rock crested with dense green and green-blue foliage. The ridge looked like the bottom row of a skull's teeth. Just beyond it the rock dropped away into a dense green carpet of valley. An old river fed by snows on mountains far to the north snaked lazily along the valley floor until it cut through the ridge to the ocean.
    "Grendel hunting grounds," Aaron said. The candidate Scouts stared down at the swamps and forests. "We stay out of there."
    At the side of a pond beneath, a herd of something vaguely resembling a cross between a horse and a pig drank nervously. Robor was only about sixty feet up now, barely ten feet higher than the tree line, so that the Scouts could see more clearly.
    With a sudden, violent splash, something exploded from the water, so fast that their eyes could hardly follow what happened next. One of the beasts at the edge of the water was bowled backward, smashed flat by the awesome velocity. Probably dead that instant. The other animals fled in all directions, in a sort of galloping waddle.
    But that wasn't what captured their interest. That wasn't what caught every eye in the lounge. No one seemed to breathe. Heartbeats may have frozen still.
    There, perched above the torn and bloodied body of the pig-creature . . . 
    Was a grendel.
    A voice came over the speaker in the lounge. "Grendel kill," Linda said from the control room. "We have just seen a grendel kill." The clear curving outer wall clouded, and a video window opened up on its right side. The death scene was replayed for them in slow motion.
    The camera brought them in close. The herd of pig-beasts drank slowly and carefully. Three stood guard above the bank while the herd went down to the water, just a few at a time, in a clumsy, laughable waddle. Then, in slow motion now, the pond's surface bulged, broke, and four meters of black death exploded from the depths.
    Jessica whispered, "Oh God," just as stunned as anyone else in the room. It was impossible not to be impressed by this creature, the most savage predator that mankind had ever faced.
    Blunt snout. Crocodile armor. Blunt, spiked tail. It emerged at rocket speed, and the pig-thing died snorting water and blood. Its body deformed as the grendel struck it. It tumbled back, plowing up dust and grass. The computer, enhancing some kind of wide-angle holo view, kept right with it. Another, wider-screen angle, still in slow motion, showed that the other animals broke and headed for cover almost instantly, running fast but at normal animal pace. No animals save grendels had ever been observed moving on speed.
    Grendel teeth had torn its victim's belly and rib cage open. Blood spurted, covering the grendel's snout. It burrowed its teeth into the wound, head deep. It ripped out a mouthful of viscera before looking around, and then up, directly at Robor.
    It opened its mouth, and closed it in that disorienting holographic slow motion. Blood and saliva drooled away from the dagger-like teeth, droplets running down as it screamed challenge at them.
    Was it the sound of the skeeter engines? Their aerial bulk? The grendel's eyes locked with them, as if uncertain of Robor's distance. As if it thought they might challenge it for the meat.
    It screamed a scream that they couldn't hear. Then it turned, and hooked its spiked tail into the carcass. Its tail differed from pictures of the Avalon grendels, with one big, gaudy hook almost underneath, and the shattered scar where a matching hook had been.
    The pig's, bleeding had slowed to a trickle. Its feet still trembled a bit. Just a twitch, now. The grendel dragged it back, down into the water.
    And the moment after it sank, the recording played again at normal speed. The pig-things approached the shore; one darted in to drink; death smashed into it and tore it apart. Jessica flinched violently.
    "Jesus," Aaron said. "I love those damned things." 
    She looked at him, and for a moment, felt something akin to jealousy. Love hadn't been too strong a word. His eyes burned. The grendels represented something . . . raw power, absolute single-mindedness . . . naked ferocity? 
    Some quality or gestalt that Aaron Tragon respected. 
    Admired.
    Loved.
    She had never been certain that he loved her. But she could never doubt that he loved grendels. Loved hunting and killing them, likely enough. But loved them. More, probably, than he loved anything else in the world.
    How very odd to feel jealous of a monster. But Aaron can't really love grendels! I couldn't love a man who--
    There was more to see: plains that sloped away from the mountains. Get a kilometer or so from running water and you saw lush vegetation and more animal life. There were creatures that looked reptilian--nothing too large, but several packs of animals that momentarily darkened the plain, then broke and ran at tile first touch of Robor's shadow.
    Here, the brush thickened to jungle density. Her heart leapt. There had been virtually no exploration of the mainland forests. Almost no categorization of flora or fauna. Little mapping, save by satellite. Except for territory immediately surrounding the mining concerns, there had been precious little of anything.
    And now . . . a lot of that was going to change.

    Lunch came and went before they caught sight of their destination. It emerged from a smoky haze, mist so thick it was almost like volcanic ash. The mountain was bare and weathered, curved and hollowed, spotted here and there with patches of green until it resembled a mossy skull.
    Pterodons arced gracefully through the heights: a touch of something familiar, thank God.
    Jessica's hands moved by themselves, checking her rucksack, as she gazed out. This land, this whole land, was theirs for the taking . . .
    It seemed that Aaron was reading her mind. "They don't want it," he said, shaking his head as if in amazement. His strong, sure fingers dug into her shoulders. It hurt, just a little bit.
    That was like Aaron. He hurt, a little. It was difficult for him to remember just how strong he was. So strong, so smart . . . so sure of himself. It was no wonder that she was in love with him. His air of remoteness only increased the temptation, and the value of the prize.
    The burr of the skeeter engines grew throaty. The floor vibrated beneath her feet as Robor took an eastern heading, sliding along a table of mountains. It was the warm season, and everything was green and brown and yellow-blue. Later in the year, there would be snow. Farther inland there were higher ranges, but here, barely two hundred miles from the coast, was a rich supply of ore. Robor passed over the first mining camp. Jessica wandered up to the control center, where Linda and Joe were reviewing telemetric reports from the site.
    "Anything new?" she asked. She ducked her head to fit into the low-ceilinged room. She watched the computers and screens as Linda pored over them, completely absorbed.
    "Ah . . . nothing. Everything is just fine. We'll be at the site in less than an hour. Check there first, and then we can look back and check the others." 
    "Any additional information?" 
    "Not sabotage."
    "Why?" she asked, trying to keep the relief from her voice.
    "The vibration signature. It's more like black powder than any of our standard blasting compounds. If somebody was going to booby-trap our mining equipment, they wouldn't use some kind of unstable low-yield compound. They'd use something concentrated, neat, reliable. That's what I'm thinking. This is just weird."
    Jessica laid a hand on her shoulder. "Oh well. You'll have your chance to inspect things close up in . . . " 
    "Thirty-seven minutes," Linda said.
    "Then we're over Grendel Valley. Aaron should be thrilled."


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 8

THE GRENDEL GOD

God answers sharp and sudden on some prayers, 
And thrusts the thing we have prayed for in our face, 
A gauntlet with a gift in 't.
-ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING, Aurora Leigh

    Old Grendel was hunting. She lay covered in mud under a mash of water and rotting vegetation. The river lay almost half a mile behind her, but the ground was soft. She'd burrowed her way up from the river over many days, clawing through the dirt, allowing the water to follow her. And here, so far from moving water that her prey must consider themselves safe, she waited.
    One was nearby. Large enough to last for three days, becoming truly sweet only on the last day. A snouted thing with hoofs and big ears and large eyes. The snout quested about, testing.
    Ah, gently, gently. If the wind shifted in the wrong direction, then Snouter would scent, and Snouter was fast enough to lead a merry chase. But not fast enough to evade Old Grendel, no, not even in these days of sluggish blood, of slow heats and rapid cooling. Old Grendel still had speed.
    Old Grendel had murky memories of her youth, when she had first emerged from the water, a dim-brained beast, before a sickness caught in the high water had opened her eyes. To the degree that she was capable of such things, she felt an almost reverential awe toward those high waters. Something there made her itch, made her head hurt until she thought she would die of the pain. She could do little but wallow in her agony, unable even to hunt effectively. Even the depths of cool water helped little. But when the pain receded . . . 
    She could see differently. She didn't know how else to think it. In her youth, Old Grendel had seen the world in basic gradients of scent and taste, of need and satiation. Her life cycled: hunger forced speed, speed created heat, heat forced her back to water. But after the change, after the swelling of her head, and the pain . . . She'd come out of it mad with hunger, too weak to fight the lake monster, until the patterns showed her what to do. Then she was the lake monster, and there was prey everywhere, everywhere she hadn't looked. Hunting was easier. She used speed less often. Fights for territory became less bloody. She saw everything more clearly, and understood what she saw.
    In those days she had been sleek, and as fast as rainfire. She was absolute death, the empress of her domain. She had given life to a hundred thousand children, and perhaps ten had survived to maturity. Those she had driven upstream to the heights, when she could. Two had tried to return, to challenge their mother on her own ground.
    Those, she gutted without mercy, the killing flare in her head and in her body stronger than thought or reason, stronger by far than any rudimentary maternal instinct.
    Those had been good days, and perhaps her greater intelligence was a curse. She was not what she had been, and she knew it. No longer so fast, so strong. Her wounds no longer healed as swiftly.
    For any creature unaware enough to be caught within her kill radius, she was a flash of teeth and claw and pebble-textured black armor and spiked tail. Sixteen feet long and a quarter ton of instant murder.
    But speed drained out of her more quickly these days, and the generated heat stayed longer. She was afraid to go as far from water as once she had.
    There were advantages to the Change. A grendel ahunt is a grendel whose mind is lost to speed. There is no thought, only action. Chase and fight and kill, a race against the heat inside; get the prey to water, and feed. Years ago the sight of prey would madden her, would drive all caution away. It was sometimes so now, but not so often. She could think ahead, imagine the consequences of actions.
    In sane moments she wondered if the tree-dwellers knew this. These wretched creatures would lure a desperately hungry grendel far from water. They darted high up into one of the thorn trees when the grendel blurred toward them, leaped from tree to tree when the grendel tore down the tree trunk.
    Old Grendel remembered that she had almost died. The creatures had led her from one tree to another until she'd nearly cooked herself. She'd be chasing one and it was gone, and here was another, out of reach and sluggishly making for another tree, and the hunger and killing urge were so terribly strong. And another farther on--
    She'd found the control to make for water before it was too late, before her internal organs roasted with the heat of her own speed. Behind her, scores of the creatures were suddenly chattering at her from every tree and tuft of grass. Long-legged and long-armed furry things made of crunchy red meat screamed their mockery. In saner memory she could see the length of their teeth . . . could see that they were also, in their strange way, hunting.
    She'd stayed clear of the forest from then on. Years later, she had seen hunter-climbers feasting on a dead grendel who had been lured too far from water and cooked in its own heat. Not of her kind, that grendel. The naked red bones of its huge shoulders and forearms named it: it was of the kind that built dams. She chased the hunter-things away and ate the corpse of the dam builder.
    There were things that hunted grendels, just as she hunted them. But what worked with a young grendel failed against Old Grendel. She had eaten hunter-climbers and found their flesh delicious; but then almost anything was delicious, even swimmers, even her own swimmers. Since the Change she was vaguely aware that while all food was good, some was better. Meat was better than plants, walkers better than swimmers, alien swimmers better than her own. It had always been so, but she hadn't known it.
    Now Old Grendel was slow. Still a blur, but a slow blur, if you like. She would wait for Snouter to get closer . . .
    The snouter stopped, turned, looked up nervously. It made a flabby wet sneezy bray and turned again, bending almost double, and bolted into the trees.
    Old Grendel was too surprised at the sound in the sky to give chase. The sound made her uneasy and reminded her of the Death Wind, but it was not the same.
    It came from the south, filling the sky, shadowing the land. Red and green. Unimaginably huge fangs. Terror on a scale she had never known filled her body, her heart. It was a grendel of cosmic size. It was God. It blotted out the sun, its giant lips grinning at her, challenging her.
    She tried to disappear into the mud. If this thing, this colossus wanted her territory, there would be nothing for her to do but die.
    But she would fight! She had to fight! It came straight at her, looming like a mountain, moving not much quicker, and she felt the speed course through her body, preparing her for action.
    The speed roared through her like a flame, and she couldn't move. She couldn't see how to reach the beast! Slow, slow, it didn't have to be a new breed of grendel. Was it challenger or meat? How to reach it? Fire roared along her veins and her mind was shutting down. That rock? No, that somewhat more distant log--
    She lurched from the mud. Mud splashed across startled snouters. Instinctively she smashed one with her tail, curling it so that the creature wasn't hooked and caught. It screamed and lurched away, but Old Grendel ignored it and flashed onward. In seconds she reached the low end of a tree that had fallen across a white boulder. For another second she was clawing her way to a stop, skidding in a curve along the mud, while the snouters scattered in all directions. She reached the naked roots and blurred up the log and launched herself, and tried to take her bearings as she flew. The God of Grendels was too big to miss.
    She had never seen anything so large in flight. Certainly she had no practice targeting such. She was falling below it. It was as if she'd jumped at a moon! Her claws were ready, she had one last surprise for the beast when it turned to snap her up . . . she'd be no more than a mouthful, but she would burn its mouth . . .
    She smacked down into an inch of shallow water over soft mud. Impact knocked her dizzy, but she clawed for leverage and skimmed a tight curve, knees and ankles buckling, across the mud for a hundred feet, then burrowed.
    She was two hundred feet from where she had been, buried snout-deep in moist dirt, motionless, with only her snorkel raised. The heat was leaking from her, the fatigue too, but too slowly. At this moment the God of Grendels could have her for a snouter. Where was it? She lifted an eye. 
    It was behind her. Above and behind, moving away.
    It was leaving! She had driven it away! She had defended her territory--
    But as, pain-filled, she crawled back to the river, the image of the hideous thing filled her mind. At some time in her long, long life, she had seen something like it before.

    Much farther away. It had flown. Its markings had been different then, not a grendel at all--a black back, pale belly, enormous eyes--but it might be of the same species. It had moved the same, sounded the same. It too had been vast, larger than a whole brood of adult grendels. Bigger than a cloud. She could not begin to comprehend its meaning.
    She had done a dangerous thing. The huge-eyed nightmare was going where she could not, where no rivers ran, and where jungles and hunter-climbers did. But she'd followed a rare rainstorm uphill, and kept moving after it was gone, up the slope of a nearby mountain.
    That was not long after the Change. With her new sight she'd felt that she could do anything. She had reached the peak of the mountain and placed herself above that thing, in time to see it sink down to kiss the earth.
    Three smaller flying things had left it. God's swimmers? Much smaller creatures had swarmed below it. Parasites, she surmised, seeking to spread their kind. But though they showed only as dots, she could guess their size. They never went on speed for as long as she watched. Slow, stupid: not grendels, but prey.
    Then she'd crawled back down to water. Never a drop of rain came to cool her. She was ravenous every step of the way, and she had never gone on speed. If she had, she would have died.
    Now this, the Grendel God. If it was prey, it would feed all the grendels beneath the sky.
    She'd been hungry before, she was ravenous now. New prey. New tastes. New games to lose and win, new blood to wet her snout.
    New, new, new.
    If Old Grendel had been able to clarify her concept of a god, she would have prayed to it. The spawn of grendels were so small, not even a mouthful. One of those two-legged things would feed her beyond her capacity. She would bury it in the mud for a day, or two, or three, until it grew sweet. Until the water bugs came and ate its eyes into raw wet sockets, and the tissues bloated with nectar. Then she would feast.
    The first tinglings of speed, urgent and warm, began to stir her. She clamped her mind down. She was already too close to being burned out. They could hunt her, this New Meat, this spawn of the Grendel God. They were slow, and clumsy, but . . . experience tried to warn her of danger. 
    All creatures make mistakes.
    Hunter-climbers made mistakes. She had cracked their bones with her teeth, and savored the sweetness within.
    She wiggled back toward the river, a few inches at a time. God floated toward the Cloud Mountain, where it began to descend. Where the first huge-eyed Great Flyer had descended. No rivers ran near there. Too far. Always too far, up the rocky slopes where she could go when there was enough rain, but that happened seldom.
    But all things were prey to a grendel, and all things must spawn. Its spawn would come down to water. If she could not eat the great flying creature, then she would eat its spawn.

    "Deadwood Pass," Jessica said. The roboticized mining camp was located on a half-mile-wide mountain pass. To the east the land fell away steeply across rocky ground to the Grendel Valley River some called the Styx four thousand feet down and five miles away. The west side of the pass was less steep, falling a thousand feet to a high desert in a mile of boulder-strewn cliff slopes. The pass was bounded by steeply rising slopes to north and south. When the First found this area ten Avalon years before, a stream had run down from the northern peak. It wasn't a large stream, but it was enough to worry the First. They had changed its course with dynamite. Where once it flowed down to the pass and then westward into the desert, now it veered to the east and fell over a series of cliffs to make spectacular waterfalls. They had installed sluice gates so that water could still be diverted to run in the old stream when Deadwood Pass was occupied.
    Water meant grendels. When grendels hunted they went on speed. It made them incredibly fast, but it also generated heat. A grendel too far from water could cook itself. They had never seen a grendel more than two kilometers from water except in rainstorms.
    Joe Sikes examined the area below with binoculars. "Base, this is Sikes. I have examined the pass and I confirm no change in water levels," he said formally.
    "Roger, Joe Sikes," Zack's voice said. "Geographic confirms no cloud formations, no rain expected, all water levels at or below normal in all directions from Deadwood. You are cleared to approach."
    "Bring her down," Sikes called. He continued to look through the binoculars, sweeping his view up and down both sides of the pass, then up and down the sharply rising peaks bounding it. "Jess, Linda, please confirm this, I see nothing." He handed the binoculars to Jessica.
    She made a cursory examination and saw Sikes grimace in disapproval. All right, I'll play your game. She looked again, this time sweeping the glasses slowly from the western desert up to the pass, across and down to the eastern valley floor. "Joeys," she said. "I see three Joeys about fifty yards north in the shade of the solar conversion cloth. Otherwise nothing."
    Linda took the glasses and looked again. "Confirm, normal, three Joeys," she said formally, then laughed. "It must be safe if the Joeys are out like that."
    "Roger," Zack's voice said. "All right, you're cleared to land. Keep us posted, and stay in touch, and we'll keep an eye on you. "

    Winds constantly blew across the pass, sometimes from the west, more often from the ocean to the southeast. The small flat area of the pass was smoothed by the constant wind. Now that the stream was diverted there was little green, just short brown and purple grass, and twisted brown bushes. The area was ugly enough, but it did hold a permanent mainland base: a square shelter to hold batteries and fuel cells, a hut good for overnight, packed with emergency supplies and technical equipment; and of course the mine itself. The north slopes above the pass were covered with solar-electric conversion material woven into the flexible sheets called Begley cloth.
    Jessica took back the binoculars and examined Deadwood Pass. The first thing she saw was a tubular frame geodesic dome crouching like a spider above a great dark hole in the earth. Usually steam would be gushing from the hole. Today there wasn't even a wisp of vapor. The problem wasn't here. They already knew that. They'd find the primary damage twenty feet away, in the refining apparatus.
    Linda had the controls while Joe gave instructions. They were both very relaxed, very professional. Jessica remembered Linda demonstrating the same kind of intense interest observing transplanted silkworms munching transplanted mulberry leaves.
    Cadzie was in a corner, sleeping. Jessica walked wide around his bassinet. He didn't seem to slow Linda down very much, or else she never showed it. She only had to plan for him . . . but how did she learn?
    The refining station was just below them through the huge windows, but they spared it not a glance. They were studying its innards on two of the viewers. One was a demonstration view--Jessica had to watch for a minute before she understood--a cartoon of the station working normally.
    The little mining drones churned up the soft coal, and a conveyor belt moved it, a chunk at a time, up and over to the refinery. The prefabricated refinery processed the crumbly stuff, turning it into thick dark bricks of protoplastic, the fodder of their building and pharmaceuticals industry. Jessica recognized this sequence: it was a classroom film.
    The other showed the refinery setup dead and mangled. Track had lurched out of one of several tunnels, had lifted and twisted the casing of the refinery system. The damaged casing was smoke-blackened across that side. Damage inside could not be seen. Ore had piled high before the system's rudimentary intelligence shut it down.
    Joe said, "I'll kiss the ass of the nerd who's good enough to be sending us that!" and added as an afterthought, "Unless it's Edgar."
    A real bomb, Jessica thought. Low-yield explosive. Wrecked equipment had forced an expedition.
    The eel, too, had forced an expedition to the mainland. Interesting coincidence? Jessica shook her head. No one would do that.
    "Touchdown in about nine minutes," Linda said.
    Jessica groped in her pocket, began pulling on tough, light gloves. "I'm ready: Eager, and willing."
    "That's what all the boys say." Linda examined her big sister craftily. "You'll probably cut out after an hour or so." 
    "Ask Joe."
    Were Joe's ears turning pink? He said, "Security check, Jess. Make sure the perimeters are secure, and none of the movement sensors have picked up anything. Then we can let the kids down."
    "And get them out of my hair. We've got work to do," Linda said.
    Jessica scrunched her nose at Linda, and paused to say "goo" to little Cadzie. "Pete Detrich," she said. "You were dating him for a while last spring . . . "
    Linda straightened her back proudly. "I'm not telling, and that's that." 
    "All right, all right . . ."
    Jessica paused at the door, and then said back over her shoulder--"Zack Moskowitz." 
    "Hah! His mustache tickles."
    Without admitting defeat, Jessica affected a slouch, leaving the room.
    Jessica climbed down a narrow spiral staircase into the cargo bay. It was vast and almost empty now, thrumming with engine vibration as they neared the ground. There were six great bay doors of molded high-impact plastic. Four were already open. She took a door next to Justin, who already had the cable attached to his belt-buckle carabiner. 
    "Race you!" he said merrily. 
    "What stakes?" 
    "You make pan biscuits tonight." 
    "Fine--or you hunt up tubers." 
    "You're on."
    She unlatched and flung her door open. The breeze ruffled her hair, cooled her face. They were fifty feet above the low, bluish grass. Even from here it looked scraggly, surviving where the heavier brush had died for lack of moisture. She tied the line through her carabiner and braced it at her hip, right hand taking the high grip, and threw the rest of the line out over the side. Before it had completely unreeled she launched herself. She looked back up, shadowed by Robor's bulk, its Chinese-dragon facade dropping away from her toward the morning sky, and laughed.
    She hadn't been the first out. That was Aaron, as usual, his hours of mountain climbing serving him well. But Justin was coming down fast, and then Katya and Trish and Toshiro, the six of them like a small colony of spiders spiraling to earth. The ropes still dangled sixteen feet above the ground when Aaron reached the bottom of his line. He paused a fatal instant, and she paused watching him, and Justin snapped free and dropped the rest of the way down, hitting and rolling like a paratrooper. He came back to his feet lightly, sporting a bruised face, a shoulder stained with dirt, and a grin of evil triumphant.
    Jessica didn't jump. The five of them jumping in concert could wobble Robor's descent.
    When it finally came within reach Justin grabbed his line and anchored it to one of the steel loops set into the ground. Katya was next down. She grunted, trying to get her cable into a ring. It wouldn't quite reach as a gust of wind took Robor sideways a few feet. Aaron grabbed the end of his line with his left hand and stretched out to grasp a steel ring with his right. His mouth gaped into an O of strain, and she heard his shoulders creak. But will and muscle and a shift of wind brought the line close enough to the ring for him to attach the mooring clip, and from there on it was easy.
    Robor's undercarriage brushed the ground, and secondary lines tied it into place. As Justin walked past her, Jessica slapped him a casual high-five.
    "Let's take a look at the processor," he said. She nodded.
    The flat was four hundred meters across, rocky and mostly barren. Up a short incline was a second terrace. They scrambled up the lip of the rise, and paused. Geodesic dome. A dozen yards away, a corrugated shed housed the automated processor. Other than those, nothing for two hundred meters in either direction. Nothing . . . then a rise of mountain, crested with bushes with purple-green, roughly triangular leaves. The dirt beneath their feet was scarred, tread-marked where mini-tractors had carried their loads of plastic bricks back to Robor.
    Ordinarily the mining equipment, sheltered beneath its dome of pipes, churned merrily away. But all was silent now.
    Jessica turned and looked below her. Robor's dragon shape stirred in the wind, seemed almost to breathe. Its red and green stubby wings struggled to break from bondage. The lower cargo doors were opening, ramps descending. One of the mini-tractors was exiting smoothly.
    Below Robor, and beyond, stretched Grendel Valley. Green, wild, twisted with vegetation. And through the very middle of it ran a river. The Styx. Death.
    Higher up were plateaus where children of Earth could play. North and east she could see three mountain ranges. The farthest high peaks were lost in the mist. In winter even the lowest would be snow-crested, but today the air was warm and moist, the light and heat of Tau Ceti steady upon them.
    Pterodons glided silkily through the peaks, more plentiful here than on Camelot. On the island they ate fish, or darted into the isolated horsemane trees to snatch eggs from a variety of Avalon crab that lived in their tops. She could see other birdlike things. Huge insects, perhaps, dragonflyish things that darted. At half a kilometer she couldn't make out details.
    The air was heavy, moist and . . . well, green.
    It smelled alive. It buzzed and hummed and crackled. The very sounds here were different, a low, heavy thrum of life. The area immediately surrounding the Styx was relatively clear, but back a kilometer or so the forest began in earnest, dense enough to satisfy any dreams of childhood discovery.
    Joe Sikes trudged up the hill while Linda followed with the tractor. Cadzie, stretching and looking about, bounced in a sling across her chest.
    "What's the schedule?" she asked Joe when he was close enough.
    Joe was laughing. "Jess, Chaka just went past me with a kind of a glass shell on his back. It must weigh a tonne. He looks like a giant turtle!" 
    "It's just the cook pot, Joe."
    "He could get something a lot lighter. Is he just showing off his muscles?" 
    She chuckled.
    "Star Born Secrets? Well, never mind. Business first," he said. "We want to take a good look at the processor." 
    Now the Biters were streaming down Robor's passenger ramps. Twenty kids, the youngest just eleven, bright healthy kids on their first trip to the mainland.
    "Stay close together," Jessica called down. "Patrol leaders check packs." She turned back to Joe. "Justin will check and if all's clear, we'll hike in and sleep at the oasis." 
    "The usual communication arrangements?" Joe was smiling a little, even through his concern.
    "Joe. You wound me. It's a sheer accident that those transmitters get switched off every time." 
    "Yeah, yeah."
    Justin was climbing up atop Robor, and had unhooked one of the three slave skeeters. He revved its engine, then whipped it up into the air and down toward the mining complex.
    "We want to get down to Paradise," Jessica said, "get things set up. If we're lucky, we can get a Run in tonight. You can handle things here?"
    "Sure," Joe said. "Straightforward diagnostic and repair. We've got the tools, and some replacement parts. Everything we need to repair--the problem is: what the hell happened, and will it happen again?"


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 9

PARADISE

I have lived some thirty years on this planet, and I have yet to hear the first syllable of valuable or even earnest advice from my seniors.
-HENRY DAVID THOREAU, Walden

    "Fall in. Count off," Justin said.
    The youngsters formed a line, oldest and largest to Justin's left, a stair step down of heads off to the right until at the end was Sharon McAndrews, not quite the youngest but certainly the shortest. Beyond Sharon, Jessica, Carey Lou, and Heather McKennie formed a small group.
    "One. Two." They counted down the line to Sharon, then the older Scouts, finally Jessica.
    "Remember your number," Justin said. "Now let's do it again. Count off. Okay. Remember your number, and remember who's on each side of you. Okay, go wander around."
    The kids scattered. Justin waited a moment, then blew a whistle. "Count off!"
    There was a moment's hesitation, then they began, "One. Two." "Twenty-six." Jessica finished the count.
    "Right. We'll be doing that a lot," Justin said. "Now the rules-"
    "We don't need no stinking rules." Carey Lou giggled. "Rules are for Earth Born."
    Justin saw that Joe Sikes was recording everything. "Not quite," he said. "There are times when you need rules, and this is one of them. Now listen:
    "Groups of three. Never less than three," he said. "One to break his leg, one to stay with him, and one to go for help. Groups of three or more. Okay? Good.
    "The trail is marked, orange paint splotches on the rocks. If you see red splotches you're off trail to the left side as we go out. Green is off trail to the right side going out. Everyone got that?"
    "Red right returning," one of the smaller ones said gravely.
    "Right-uh, correct. And Jessica is Tail End Charlie. Nobody gets behind Jessica. No one. When I look back and see Jessica I want to be sure everyone is ahead of her.
    "When either Jessica or I call 'Count off' you count off, right then, and nobody ever answers for anyone else. This isn't Camelot! There are grendels out here." 
    Some of the Grendel Biters exchanged knowing looks. 
    "Okay." Justin turned to Joe Sikes. "Latest reports?" 
    "All clear to Paradise," Sikes said. He didn't sound happy. "You're cleared to trek. Good luck." 
    "Thanks. Okay, let's move out."
    Chaka lifted his pack-minimal gear, plus the glass cauldron that was big enough to serve them all-and swung it into place with a grunt. He hadn't done that a moment early. Joe Sikes shook his head and turned toward the minehead.
    Justin unslung his rifle and checked the loads, then led off down the side of the pass, down north and eastward toward the green valley and the grendels. There wasn't any danger up this high. Everything they knew about grendels said they couldn't go far from water. Still, he looked everywhere, ahead, to the sides. It was his fourth trip, the third as leader, and every time there was that feeling in the pit of his stomach.
    The first time Justin had come down this trail his father had been leader, and Joe Sikes had been Tail End Charlie. There had been a big fight in the council, with Zack adamant that no children would go to the mainland.
    "Think again, Zack," Cadmann had said. "You have to let go sometime." 
    "No."
    "Speak for yourself, Zack. You can give orders down here, but my family hasn't been part of your jurisdiction since a year after we came here." 
    "That's not fair."
    "Which way did you mean that?" Sylvia demanded. There'd been a buzz of conversation and whispers as everyone remembered those times. Cadmann had predicted danger. No one had believed him. No one believed there were any dangers on the island at all. They were all sure it was pranks, or something worse, an old military man's desperate efforts to be needed. Until the first grendel attack. Then Colonel Weyland had taken his share of tools and equipment and gone up to build the Stronghold, and if he hadn't done that, when the samlon changed the grendels would have killed everyone on the planet. No one liked to think about that, not then and not now. Colonel Cadmann Weyland, warrior and Cassandra. And now Zack kept seeing dangers.
    The trail was dry and dusty, which made Justin feel better. Grendels didn't like dry and dusty. After fifteen minutes he stopped. The two youngsters who'd been trying to keep up with him gratefully leaned against boulders. Behind him the Grendel Biters were strung out along the steeply rising trail. No sign of Jessica, but the trail threaded among boulders. "Count off!"
    "One. Two." The count moved back along the trail until he couldn't hear any longer. There was a pause, then more shouts passed back up the trail. "All present."
    He took a moment to raise his binoculars. They hadn't had good binoculars the first time, just the increasingly rare and valuable war specs. Those had come all the way from Earth. Once there had been fifty pairs of the computer-enhanced optical systems. Now only eight remained.
    But a year ago they'd been able to schedule the time for Cassandra to build optical grinding equipment, and now they had binoculars in a variety of strengths and fields. These were 10 X 60, really too heavy for backpacking, but he could see a long way, and they worked well into twilight.
    War specs were Cassandra's eyes. The First could see through those; but they couldn't see through binoculars.
    Justin scanned the area below. Far down in the valley something moved among the grass at the river's edge. Almost certainly a grendel. Not much else lived that close to a river. But sometimes-sometimes there were large things that didn't look much like grendels. They never stayed still or visible long. What were they? Another kind of grendel? They didn't know, and that ate at Justin.
    This was their planet but all they really knew was that anywhere there was water there were grendels. All kinds of grendels. Some made dams, some hunted farther from the river. Some lived in shallow mud, some couldn't live without submerging themselves in river water, but if there was water, there were grendels.
    The river was low. The lakes formed by grendel dams were not much more than ponds, and where there had been grassland and bushes last year there was nothing but caked mud with vast cracks. And above that were dry rock and horseman trees. Grendels couldn't live in the rocky ground above the river, but Justin scanned the rocks and sand ahead anyway. Nothing there but swirls of dust kicked up by the rising wind behind him. On Earth there would be snakes. He'd seen them in films. Avalon didn't seem to have evolved the snake, and so far they hadn't encountered anything particularly venomous, at least not to humans.
    "Watch your feet," Chaka sang out. He was rolling along like a juggernaut, ignoring the way the ground rose. "Justin, Carlos will want that shell if you've got room." 
    Now Justin saw it too, an empty shell with a golden iridescence, curled and fluted, lying in the mud like a dinner platter lost from the Sun King's palace. Centerpiece crabs were big enough to catch Joeys, the largest thing that lived in these dusty areas. Their jaws held crud and corruption but they weren't dangerous to anyone with boots on. Carlos made wonderful things from their shells.
    "Maybe coming back," Justin said. His pack would be lighter and roomier too.
    "Okay. Kids, pass the word back, it's on your left and don't miss it. The centerpiece crab evolves those shells as a mating display. He wouldn't do that if he had to see to his defenses. You see an animal get that gaudy, or a bird, you know it's because he's been threat-free for a long time." 
    Carrying that mucking great pot, why wasn't Chaka puffing? Nobody else could do that, barring Aaron.
    Behind Justin, Katya Martinez had her binoculars out. "Ha." 
    "Ha?"
    "Joeys. Off trail to the left, about three hundred meters ahead."
    "Ah. Good. If there's Joeys there aren't grendels. Okay, kids, let's go." Justin led them onward, through the dry rocky ground. The air seemed even drier than usual, a hot dry wind blowing through the pass from behind them. 
    "Devil wind," Katya said. 
    "Devil, you say?"
    "They called it a Santa Ana back in California. Air mass flows down a mountain range, you get a foehn wind. Sirocco in Europe. Hot, dry compressive beating, tots of positive ions. Makes people nervous. You feel it, don't you?" 
    "Guess so. You read much about it?" 
    "Some." 
    "Anything I ought to know?"
    "Do you think I wouldn't tell you? Ha. See, it's getting to me, too."

    The trail led down and north along one of the mountain ridges framing Deadwood Pass. Twelve kilometers from the pass there was a saddle. Their dusty trail led to the right, then steeply uphill. Dimly above they could see green trees, bushes, tall but straggly grass. Justin called a halt.
    "Fall in. Count off." He waited for the responses. "Okay, listen up." He pointed up the hill. "That's where we're going. Chaka, Katya, and I'll go up first. The rest of you follow along, but stay together. Jessica will tell you when it's safe to come up." He unslung his rifle and again checked the loads, then waited until Little Chaka and Katya had done the same. He carried the rifle at the ready as he led them up the hill.
    "Are there grendels up there?" Sharon MacAndrews asked solemnly.
    "Not there," one of the older Grendel Biters answered. There were snickers.
    "Never been any so far," Justin said. "Not so far." 
    Eight years before he'd followed Cadmann up that trail. Aerial surveys showed there wasn't anything large up there, and Geographic's IR sensors had never seen anything. "So what are we worried about, sir?" he'd asked.
    "Caves. The second grendel lived in a river cave," Cadmann had said, limping along on a stick carved by Carlos and a skinny new regrown leg. "We went in after it. Stupid of us, we didn't know what grendels were." They'd gone up slowly, while two armed skeeters flitted about watchfully. "We lost good men hunting that grendel." 
    "Looks quiet." Chaka's words brought Justin out of his reverie.
    Paradise was a garden mount in a desert of dusty volcanic rock. It thrust upward from the side of the mountain range, a rocky slope that rose steeply for nearly two thousand feet. The gentle bowl at the top was a five-hundred-foot circle no more than fifty feet deep at the center. Some trick of nature had placed a spring at one lip of the dish. Water gushed up and ran down into the dish. At the bottom of the dish the water vanished into the ground, never to reappear. Paradise was a high oasis with no streams leading in or out.
    They circled the mound until they came up over the lip on the side opposite the spring. Vegetation was sparse here, but most of the bowl was covered with grasses and horsemane trees. Insects flitted among the plants. One flew closer to have a look at them.
    It was smaller than a hummingbird, but larger than the insects of Earth. There were two large wings as rigid as the wings on an airplane, and a blur beneath it from its motor wings. It hovered near and didn't seem afraid of them at all. After a while it lost interest and flew back down into the bowl.
    At the bottom of the bowl was a tree that seemed covered with webbing. Something moved in there.
    Justin scanned the bowl, first unaided, then with his binoculars. Finally he opened his communicator. "We're here. I see nothing unusual," he said.
    "Roger. Geographic reports nothing unusual," Joe Sikes said. "You're cleared to take the kids in. Only this time try to keep the radios working."
    "Sure thing." Justin flicked the channel switch. "Bring them up, Jessica. All clear."

    Dusk.
    "It's getting late," Jessica said. "You sure you want to do this?"
    "Part of the job," Justin said. "And it won't get any earlier. Chaka? Coming?" 
    "Sure." 
    "Me too," Katya said.
    "I think I should go," Jessica said.
    "Nope. Someone's got to be in charge here, and that's you. Let's do it." Justin looked over his rifle. "Check your loads. Right. Here we go."
    He led the way out of the bowl, over the lip, and down toward the river far below.

    Jessica stood at the rim and watched them until they were out of sight among the volcanic rocks. "I've got a bad feeling about this," she told herself, but she grinned, because she'd had the same feeling last year, and the year before, and it hadn't meant anything. Mostly I just want to go with them . . . 
    She went back to the kids. They were sprawled on the grass. Youngsters that age can be energetic, blurs one moment, motionless heaps the next. Another talent lost with age . . . 
    Two of them had discovered the insect life in the grass. Jessica bent down next to them and peered between the yellowish purple blades. Something that looked like a red-orange beetle was caught in a sticky webbing, and thousands of blue mites, so small they resembled a powder, were swarming over him. They stripped the beetle and carried the parts away into the rocks.
    The mites disappeared, leaving only an empty blue shell dangling from a transparent web.
    Damn that was fast, she thought. Insects on speed?
    She shook her head. "All right!" she called. "Campsite is down in the bowl. Let's get to it-we've got a lot of setup before dusk."
    She hauled the kids up, complaining, and set them on their way, and followed after them. But she still couldn't quite get the memory of those mites out of her mind. If a Biter laid his sleeping bags in a nest of those . . .
    Blankets and sleeping bags, tents and cookstoves were produced, assembled, spread about. The entire camp sprang into existence like magic, a bubbling, steaming, jostling cacophony filled with busy bodies and giggling children, Grendel Scouts scurrying about on secretive missions, and Grendel Biters channeled into busywork and told to mind their own business.
    Carey Lou shucked off his backpack, and looked about for a place to call home. He wandered a little away from the main camp, toward the familiar shape of a horsemane tree.
    The frozen-waterfall appearance entranced him. He had spent many nights back on Camelot in the shaded comfort of the local trees, and had stolen his first kiss in their shadow. He shucked off his backpack, perhaps nurturing romantic thoughts, and stepped toward the tree.
    Jessica grabbed his shoulders, and marched him around. "No." Bad idea. 
    "Why?"
    She brushed some of the hanging fronds aside. "Take a closer look," she said sternly.
    He looked, and gulped. This wasn't at all like the friendly, sleepy trees on the island. From the root to as far up the trunk as they could see, and even in the strands of the mane itself, the entire tree was infested with symbiotes, parasites, things.
    Near the base, the greenish brown mane had turned milky, and took on the appearance of a coarse spiderweb. Something was fluttering in one of those nearby. Maybe prey, maybe predator, maybe spider. Carey Lou didn't get close. He gulped again. "Maybe that one over there?" 
    "These things are notoriously hospitable to local life. Give it a try," she said.
    Carey Lou walked cautiously to a second tree. He looked closely: no symbiotes. Relieved but still cautious, he pulled out his rolled tent. His thin arms snapped the roll outward and it unfurled into a triangle, then popped open further: a disk, then an open dome.
    Four startled Avalon birds dropped out of the horsemane tree like so many dinner platters. They caught themselves, and wheeled around the tent as it settled to the grass like a big balloon. Two brushed wings, whirled to fight. One knocked the other spinning. It dropped toward a tree a dozen meters farther out, recovered too late. The tree had it.
    Carey Lou stepped close, but not too close. Jessica was behind him, fingers resting on his shoulders. The bird: she could see details, now that it was trapped. Two big rigid wings, curved up at the tips into spiffy little vertical fins. Four little translucent oar blades, the motor wings, were still trying to thrash the bird loose.
    The creature's relationship to a sea crab was very clear. The rigid wings had been a bifurcated shell, way long ago. That early crab hadn't been so specialized as today's crabs.
    Jessica stepped forward, reached gingerly into the web. She was ready for something like a big spider. If anything had scuttled toward her hands she would have jerked back. Nothing did, and she pulled the bird loose, holding it by one wing. The motor wings buzzed, trying to pull it away. She held on until she had brushed webbing from the fixed wings. It was too rigid to bite her, but it shivered hard in her hand, trying to twist around to escape.
    "I've seen these before," she said. "Have you? Where have you seen something like this?" 
    She waited expectantly.
    Carey Lou studied it, knowing that she wanted him to get it right. His eyes suddenly opened wide. "Sea crabs!" he exclaimed.
    "Right . . . go on."
    "Split shell. You know, the wings are more like a beetle's than a bird's."
    Jessica released the bird. It hovered for a moment. The four blurred motor wings were splayed like legs on a coffee table. Then they tilted aft and it zipped away. She said, "Very good. The grendels don't like salt water much-so there was a lot more variety in the life-forms just off the coast. All those crab things. Strange how often the pattern has repeated itself on the land, isn't it? We've seen leaf-cutting bee-things like little crabs, and birds like crabs . . . " 
    "And crabs like crabs . . ."
    She laughed. "Anyway-our lesson for the night-camp only in the open, and back with everyone else. Now scoot." She swatted his behind, sending him back toward the others.
    She waited there in the clearing for a moment, smelling the forest. This was good. There was nothing around here that could hurt someone Carey Lou's size . . . but it wasn't a bad idea to put the fear of God in him. 
    A little healthy fear could keep you alive.

    One of Old Grendel's daughters held the river hereabouts. Old Grendel moved up a tributary. Why fight her own blood, when far more interesting prey were about? She had a score of crabs trapped here. They hadn't tried to crawl past her; they were crawling upstream, and Old Grendel followed at her leisure.
    She was following the weirds.
    Far above her, the daughters of God had settled out of sight. They had come from the drylands, a place Old Grendel never expected to see close up, but now they had landed much closer. Those flattish shapes with their blurred wings reminded her of the near-universal shape of the Avalon crabs. But the huge grinning Grendel God was of a different shape entirely. Perhaps the "daughters" were parasites.
    And the little ones, could they be parasites on the parasites?
    She could see three, four of the little ones at the edge of the cliff, looking about them, then withdrawing one by one. Now others moved downslope, slowly, clumsily. Would they come to her?
    No, they were gone before they came that far. Old Grendel observed patiently. The sky was darkening before she saw them again. Five, six weirds moving back up the rocky slope.
    Old Grendel believed she could reach them.
    She could see the tip of a tree up there. Likely there was water.
    She would have to drink until she could barely move. If her daughter caught her then, she would die. With a belly like a drum, she would have to crawl two miles uphill without ever going on speed. At the top she would have used up every erg of energy; she would be dry as an old bone. 
    If there was no water, she would die. 
    If anything attacked her, she would die.
    Watch them move, slow and clumsy, easy prey. It was like watching hunter-climbers. Old Grendel flashed underwater and crunched down on a bite-sized crab. She would see where else the weirds led her.

    At suppertime there were baked potatoes, and Cajun-style greens, and a Grendel Scout favorite, a rolled biscuit-bread baked in the campfire.
    And as they settled down to enjoy the feast, the kids were treated to another specialty.
    With great ceremony, Aaron and Chaka tramped back in from the shadows, carrying a steaming cauldron between them. "This," Chaka announced, "is the specialty of the house. This is the real reason that we like to come over here. There's never enough of it to take back to the island." He paused, and then said smilingly: "There really isn't enough for you guys, either, but if there's any left, you can divvy it up."
    The kids looked suspicious, but when the older Scouts didn't even invite them to eat, and promptly served themselves, Carey Lou shouldered his way over, poked a spoon in, and tasted.
    He pronounced it delicious, and they dove in.
    It was like a thick jambalaya, served over crumbled biscuit. Delicious. It was filled with things that chewed like mussel and tasted like clams or fish. Several times someone asked what it was composed of, and received only an evasive smile in return.
    "Secret recipe," Aaron said, and everyone broke up laughing.
    There was only a tiny helping for each of the kids, enough to whet their appetite for burgers. "Mainland Stew," they were told, was for full Scouts only.
    After a little wait, Jessica inquired innocently, "Who'd like some for lunch tomorrow?" 
    All hands went up.
    "Well," she said. "I guess we have to respect the public demand, now, don't we?"

    Carey Lou belched with satisfaction. "So tonight," he said. "Tonight we get to find out more about grendels?" 
    "Tonight," Aaron said.
    Heather McKennie leaned forward, her dark eyes intense. "They were like a feeding frenzy coming after our parents, huh? Like sharks on earth?"
    One of the other kids chimed in: "Or like piranhas! I saw that James Bond movie, and they ate that woman right up!" 
    "Blood-crazed monsters . . . "
    Justin laughed. "I read up on piranhas. It wasn't really blood that triggered them. There was this guy who went down to the Amazon. Zoologist named Bellamy. Went down there and studied the little bastards." 
    "Why?" Aaron asked curiously.
    "Well, their behavior didn't make sense to him. The stupid little buggers rip each other to pieces. Dinnertime isn't a friendly affair at all."
    "Ghastly business." Katya's "upper-class" English accent was terrible. "Not a black-tie occasion?" 
    "They'd eat the tie too. Now, our barmy zoologist began wondering: what's in it for the fish?"
    He dropped his voice. "So they went to the village where it happens. Where the natives throw pigs into the water, for the entertainment of the tourists. And they'd throw one of these terrified creatures in the water, and it would thrash-and the water would churn with blood. Piranhas ripped it to ribbons in a couple of minutes. Just like in the movies." 
    Justin was getting into it now. "And he wondered: Was it the blood? Was it? And he took a bloody knife, and slipped it into the water . . . " 
    They held their assembled breath.
    "And nothing happened. Nothing. And then . . . he slipped his foot into the water." 
    "Jesus. What happened?"
    "Nothing. And then he slipped his hand into the water-" 
    "Christ! Did he stick his dick in the water too?" 
    "I have no idea," Justin said haughtily. "I did hear that he later requested an audition with the Vienna Boy's Choir, but that was likely a coincidence." Justin gave the speaker a nasty look.
    "At any rate-then he slapped the water with an oar, and they went crazy." He leaned back. "It was the splash that did it, all along. Drives 'em nuts."
    Aaron nodded slowly, thoughtfully. "I bet you have trees overhanging. Monkeys or something fall in occasionally . . . " 
    "Yeah. Instant piranha chow."
    "Well, but there aren't many trees that overhang the water, and monkeys aren't that stupid," Chaka said. "Not enough critters fall in the water, certainly not enough to affect evolution of the fish." 
    "So why?" Aaron asked. "What is in it for the fish?" 
    "Absolutely nothing," Chaka said. "It's extra behavior." 
    "Extra?"
    "Extra. Extraneous. Useless. Something that got genetically coded with a real survival characteristic. Happens all the time." 
    "We haven't found anything like that here," Justin said.
    "How do you know? We haven't had the chance to look," Katya said. "Not over here. We understand Camelot, but really, the grendels didn't leave much to understand. Here there's a real ecology, but they won't let us come look at it." 
    "They," Heather said solemnly. "The First." 
    "They're just trying to take care of us," Sharon McAndrews said. "Aren't they?"
    "Jailers take care of their charges, too," Aaron said. "You can't be a prison warder without a prisoner-" 
    Sharon McAndrews frowned. "You told us that you would tell us some things. About our parents." The other kids echoed her enthusiastically, but she sounded a little nervous.
    Justin, Jessica and Aaron looked at each other. "Not tonight," Aaron said softly. "Tomorrow night. But not tonight." 
    "Why then? Why not now?" 
    "Because-" Justin began.
    "You sound like a First," Heather said.
    "Maybe I do. But we do have reasons," Justin said. "These are things you have to learn first. You'll know before we leave here."
    "Is that a promise?" Sharon McAndrews sounded younger than her twelve years. 
    "Sure, it's a promise," Aaron said.
    They sipped their coffee, and watched each other without speaking. Unspoken was the thought: First, Carey Lou has an appointment. He won the lottery.

    Carey Lou had been asleep for no more than an hour when they came for him. They said nothing. Blindfolded him and tied his hands behind his back. Thrust a rope between his teeth. Someone spoke, in a voice too gruff for recognition: "Hold on to this, and follow us. If you drop it, we leave you for the grendels."
    Thank God they slipped shoes onto his feet before leading him away from the camp, out into the woods. 
    He had no idea how long he walked, or what time it was.
    He lost track of the distance. He could see nothing, but felt every slap of brush, heard every night sound. He kept telling himself that this was calculated. This was all planned. They wouldn't really leave him for the grendels . . .
    Still, his teeth bore down on that half-inch hemp until he was certain that it would break off in his mouth.

    "Shhh," Justin whispered. He adjusted his night glasses, binoculars with big lenses to gather as much light as possible, and focused in. Fourteen-year-old Carey Lou was about twenty-five yards from the edge of the water, and looked ready to soil his pants. Unfortunately, he wasn't wearing pants. Or shirt, or socks-anything, in fact, but an expression of stark terror. The boy stared back at them beseechingly. His hands were strangling the grendel gun. He knew that somewhere back in those shadows was Heather McKennie, she of the cutoff jeans, freckles, tanned hide, and raunchy sense of humor. Heather, a whole enormous two years older than Carey. Heather would be his prize . . .  
    If he survived the night.
    "Carey . . . " She called from somewhere in the darkness, beyond the torches.
    "Oh, sleet," he said, and took another step closer to the water. Twenty-three feet now.
    Justin's rifle scope gave him a good angle on the pond. Aaron would be fifty feet to the north, similarly equipped. Little Chaka was farther south. All wore the modified infrared scopes. They would have barely a second to act, but that would be enough. Reacting to grendel flare was something Avalonians learned almost before they could walk. 
    Carey took another step closer to the water.
    Burbling just beyond him was a spot already identified as a grendel hole. That meant a mama, and a flock of young'uns in the larval stage of grendel development. Samlon. They knew that upon maturation Mama would drive them out. In lean times she would eat the samlon themselves. On the island of Camelot, an entire ecology had developed-samlon eating algae, mamas eating samlon. They also knew that under ordinary circumstances, momma grendels would eat anything rather than their own young.
    They would certainly eat tender fourteen-year-old colonists.
    Jessica's voice wafted from somewhere in the bushes. "Just a little closer, Carey . . . "
    Carey, stark naked, terribly alone, looked back into the brush. He would be blinded by the torches, unable to see anything.
    Justin remembered his first grendel hunt. He hadn't been alone, but there hadn't been a backup team behind him either. He'd waded into the water, going slowly, feeling stark terror, but more too. Carey would be feeling that now.
    Stark terror. Anger. Fear. And excitement, because if the grendel came and he survived, he would be a man.
    Naked except for the grendel gun, shivering with the cold, Carey took another step toward the water-
    And then the water parted. Something glided from its depths. A black destroyer. A fanged shadow. A thing of terror and appetite, made flesh. It blinked slowly, placidly at the naked creature trembling before it, and took a lazy step.
    Carey shifted his rifle at the first disturbance. The kid was quick. Skinny, but quick. Justin was already sighting-
    Carey screamed, aimed, and fired. The grendel gun bucked, and a splash of Day-Glo orange splayed across the grendel's snout. The grendel blurred, flying toward Carey at heart-stopping speed. Carey fired again, and shouted, "Oh, sleet!"
    Another long second, and the marrow had to be freezing in his veins. Perhaps the first bitter words of condemnation and a forlorn prayer were beginning to form on his lips . . . 
    Then fire flared in the darkness behind the torches. Three shots almost as one. A quarter second later, a fourth shot. Then the grendel was hit six, seven, eight times, slammed by heavy-caliber slugs that fried its nervous system, turned its assault into a leaping spasm, splashing toward the paralyzed Carey, who seemed to be watching the entire tableau in slow motion.
    He staggered to the left as the grendel thundered to earth. It was on its side, its projected prey forgotten now. Alive, but in an awful agony as its own speed sacs overloaded. A quarter ton of amphibian death clawed at the ground, screaming, chasing its own tail in diminished circles, tearing up earth and rock and grass there in the half circle of the firelight, its dying hiss burning their ears . . . 
    Steam rose from its body. Its claws and tail trembled, twitched, and were still at last.
    Carey turned back to look at them as they emerged from the shadows. Jessica hung back, her motion sensors wary for additional predators. They were pretty certain about this-only one momma per hole. But grendels had surprised them before.
    Not this time, but it had happened.
    "You . . . bastards," Carey said. Panting, he flung his rifle down on the ground. Pitiful in his nakedness, he had clearly wet himself, but was unconscious of it.
    "You incredible bastards." He took another breath, and held it. This was a critical moment. He looked back at the grendel. Justin remembered the first time they had done this, and what the kid had said afterward. There had been no one to do this for him-he was one of the eldest Star Born, and no Earth Born even dreamed that something like the Grendel Run was going on. None of the Earth Born would do something so risky . . . and so much fun.
    But he knew that Carey was looking at them. And the rifles, and then at the grendel. And remembering the incredibly short pause before the grendel was blown back into the water. Less than a second. Time enough to lose control of his bladder. Time enough to feel more naked and defenseless than he had ever imagined a human being could feel. Time enough to experience the incredible precision required by a kill team.
    Carey looked at them and swallowed. He knew somehow that his entire reputation for machismo rested upon what he said next.
    "Well . . ." He strained to sound casual. He bent, picked up his rifle. He walked toward them until he was standing three feet from Justin. He extended the rifle with his left hand. Justin extended his own right to take it-and Carey hit him, quite hard and very quickly, with his right fist, just under the left ear.
    Justin stumbled back, tripped, and went down.
    Finally Carey smiled. "That was . . . pretty fair shooting." He watched Justin carefully.
    Justin pushed himself up to a sitting position. He felt his jaw tenderly. "Got a pretty good right there, kid." And held up his hand.
    Carey took it and yanked him up, then stood with his legs slightly apart, well balanced. His lopsided grin was challenging. "Hendrick's a good coach," he said. Justin nodded. No action. A great sigh seemed to go through them all, a release of tension.
    "You'd have got him, you know," Justin said. "It was a good hit." 
    "Why the hell do you do that?" Carey asked. 
    "It's fun," Aaron said.
    Justin frowned. "We had a kid panic once. Nobody got shot, but it was close." 
    "Why paint? Cassandra would know if I hit--oh." 
    "Heh. Cassandra doesn't know about this. Jesus, can you imagine what Zack would do?" 
    They all laughed. 
    "So who panicked?" 
    Justin looked at him and shook his head. 
    "Edgar," Aaron said. 
    Carey smiled knowingly.
    "Got the grendel, though," Justin said.
    Carey coughed politely. "Who's got my clothes? My nuts are freezing."
    Heather sashayed out of the dark. "Here's a blanket," she said sweetly. The blanket was wrapped around her. When she opened it, there was nothing underneath but Heather.
    Carey swallowed hard. It wasn't certain, but the good bet was that Carey was still a virgin. Well, this evening would see the end of that onerous burden.
    Heather wrapped the blanket around the both of them, and Carey became very, very involved in a kiss. Amid the general cheering, the two of them retreated from the firelight.
    Aaron grinned. "Today I am a man," he said. 
    "Indeed. Now. Jessica-any other ghoulies about?" 
    "No grendel-sized heat sources. Let's harvest some samlon."

    By the time they got back to Heorot, Tau Ceti was rising over the mountains.
    Mercifully, the day was set for lazing and play. Carey Lou managed to stagger to his tent and collapse. Or at least they assumed that he was collapsing. Heather was with him, and the more Justin thought about it, the more he was convinced that a fourteen-year-old libido just might be impervious to fatigue, fear, and a thorough workout by the (rumor had it) inexhaustible Miss McKennie. 
    Ah, youth.
    The day passed quickly, samples were gathered and catalogued, lessons on wildlife and herbology were taught by the elder Scouts, and a considerable amount of skinny-dipping, impromptu tree-climbing competitions, and general hell-raising continued through the day.
    When evening finally fell again, there was a pleasant air of fatigue settling over the camp. They had shared two extremely alive days. Carey had also learned that three other Biters had suffered as he had. He was a member of a fraternity now, and he was already relishing the thought of passing that favor to one of the younger kids in a few years. Say, his younger brother Patrick . . .

    The cook fires were burning, and soon dinner would be prepared. But there was another question still on the Biters' minds, and they had pestered their elders all day long.
    Finally, Aaron sat them down, not a shred of playfulness in his attitude.
    "All right," he said. "There's something serious we need to talk about tonight. Tonight, it's time that you learned things." 
    "About our parents?" Sharon asked.
    "Things about your parents. And grandparents. There are reasons why they didn't come over here. Why we're the ones." 
    "Why?"
    Justin and Jessica looked at each other nervously; then Justin said, "When you freeze something that has water in it, you get ice crystals. They thought that they had whipped the problems, but something went wrong. They froze the crew of Geographic. They woke them up in shifts for various duties around the ship, crossing from Sol to Tau Ceti. And there were problems." 
    "Problems?" Carey asked.
    "Yes. When you freeze people for a hundred years and then wake them up, chances are you've formed some ice crystals in their brains. Wake them twice, you get more crystals. Crystals rupture cells, mess it up in-" He tapped his skull. "-here." 
    "What did it do?"
    "A lot of our parents aren't as smart as they used to be. They get emotional problems, too. Coordination. Early strokes. Just plain stupidity. At first it didn't really matter. They were still smarter than most people they'd known, and they'd chosen the island because it was safe. No problems to face, nothing they couldn't deal with. Even then, they got in the habit of talking things over, being sure they weren't doing something stupid-" 
    "Rules," Sharon McAndrews said.
    "Rules," Justin agreed. "And that was good enough for a while. There weren't any real dangers here, none that they knew about anyway. Then, the first grendel came. They didn't understand. They had rules, and they stuck to the rules, and it didn't work, but Colonel Weyland helped them and they defeated the first grendels. They went hunting, and when they thought they had killed all the grendels, they hadn't. You know about that. What you don't know is how bad it shook them. After the Grendel Wars they stopped trusting themselves and they stopped trusting each other. They didn't work well together when the grendels popped up, and that's one of the reasons that our parents are so afraid of them now."
    There was silence. Justin could see it: they were trying to find a lie in the story. But there were too many clues. They knew, they had always known. There was something wrong with Mom, with Dad. With Uncle. They had always known, but never had a label. 
    Now they did.
    "Ice on his mind," Carey Lou said. "I've heard that, but nobody would tell me what it meant-"
    "And my mother slapped me when I said it to her," Sharon said.
    "Christ," Carey Lou said. "What can we do?" 
    "Love them," Jessica said. "They're doing the best they can. That's what we expect of you. Just love them, but do your own thinking. Including about their rules. That's why they make rules. They don't trust their own thoughts, not when they act alone. So they try to get a collective judgment on everything that can happen, and make that a rule, and then they follow the rules no matter what."
    "Ice on their minds," Carey Lou said again, slowly. "Son of a bitch!"

    Aaron and Trish carried a pole across their shoulders, with a dozen netted samlon suspended from it. They were singing some kind of hunting song or working song . . . "Heigh ho, heigh ho, it's off to hunt I go" . . . making up verses as they approached the campfire.
    Water was already simmering and bubbling in the glass cauldron. Potatoes and onions had been brought over from Camelot, but there was more: mainland bulbs and leaves known to be edible, and tasty. Some of the brighter Scouts noticed how flashlights had been focused into the cauldron, so that the vegetables could be seen dancing around in the roiling water.
    There was an air of excitement, and someone ooh'd as Justin produced a wicked-looking knife and sliced the heads off the samlon.
    "Look at their eyes," he said. "But for us, they would have been grendels one day, and hunted us. We killed them first. What eats grendels?" he asked. "We eat grendels." 
    They were as tense as an audience awaiting a magic trick. Justin figured that that was pretty close to accurate.
    His blood-smeared hands gathered the beheaded samlon up and carried them to the pot, dropping them into the water. 
    The water foamed with blood.
    "Watch," Justin said, "watch and see . . ." 
    Those first few trips, the Scouts had been crawling all over each other to watch and see, to look down into an inadequate aluminum pot. Once Ansel Stevens fell in and scalded his whole arm. Once there was a full riot. The pots kept getting bigger, but the Scouts still missed most of the action, until Chaka got big enough to carry this mucking great glass cauldron. And now everyone could see it all.
    The three gallons of water in the pot churned. The samlon sank, and then churned up to the surface again, in a curious and disquieting imitation of life.
    Something was happening. The flesh of the samlon split, and worm-like things boiled out. Scores of them. Hundreds. Pale, fleshy things churning and dying in the boiling water, turning the clear bubbling broth into a kind of thick gumbo . . . or jambalaya.
    The Biters pulled back, choking. There rose from the red kettle a stench of blood.
    And in a disturbing way . . . it was a good smell. Like last night's savory aroma, only stronger.
    Justin and Aaron and Katya and Jessica and the other Second watched ghoulishly. The children stared at the kettle, sniffed at it One of them fled to the entrance of the cave and vomited.
    In a half hour the brew was done, and ladled into bowls. It was an evil-looking mess, filled with fragments of samlon heads and the gutted carcasses now torn into chunks by Katya's bloody knife. The dead worms and corkscrew things were bloated pinkly in death. There were little transparent crabs no bigger than a Biter's fingernail. The base stock was as crimson as tomato soup. It looked filled with insects.
    Aaron held the bowl to his lips. The Biters watched him, horribly fascinated.
    "Mmmmm," he raised the spoon to his lips. He blew on it. Something thick and wormy flopped over the edge of the broad spoon. He slurped it up as if it were vermicelli, making a smacking sound. "Delicious." 
    "Dinner," Jessica said, "is served."


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 10

THE FIRST CHURCH OF THE GRENDEL

In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness. 
Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily; be thou my strong rock, for an house of defense to save me. 
For thou art my rock and my fortress; therefore for thy name's sake lead me, and guide me.
Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my strength.
Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.
-Psalm 31:16

    Jessica rose only when she was absolutely certain that the others were asleep. On tiptoes, she crept out of the cave. The soft purring snores of sleeping children surrounded her. She felt a delicious synthesis of maternal concern and utter wickedness.
    Aaron waited just outside the cave, and held a finger to his lips. "Shhh."
    Jessica nodded, understanding the need for secrecy. This wasn't for Justin. Not anymore-he had made his choice, and Jessica had made hers. Her heart thudded in her chest as she followed Aaron down the path. They passed a tree, and it wasn't until they had passed that she realized that it wasn't just a shadow, but Trish, dark as the night. A Bottle Baby.
    Trish joined them as they moved silently down the trail. Little Chaka and others drifted into their line until there were seven in all. They came to a small clearing near a very shallow running stream.
    "Running water," she observed unnecessarily. "Everything I am, and everything I've learned says to stay away from it." 
    Aaron nodded. "In mortis veritas," he said.
    He pulled a stone away from a cairn of fist-sized, smooth rocks. Then all seven of them were rolling away rocks, until they exposed a small kettle wrapped in transparent plastic.
    Trish produced a hot plate and a battery cell. Toshiro brought water from the stream, and filled the small kettle.
    Jessica's stomach felt light and fluttery. During the day she watched Aaron studying leaves and plants with the intensity of a trained ethnobotanist. She was one of the very few who knew why he studied so intently. Quietly, without drawing any attention to himself, he had collected the plants that he needed.
    He had also collected the grendel's liver.
    Speed generates enormous heat. The metabolic byproducts would kill the grendel, just as the by-products of combustion will kill a fire. Its liver and bile ducts-or the grendel versions thereof-are awesome. A grendel can eat anything, and survive the products of its own massive oxidation, because of its efficient cooling and detoxification systems.
    At thirteen years of age, Aaron had analyzed grendel bile ducts, livers, and other organs of cleansing with a view to psychopharmacology.
    At fourteen he had created the Ritual. Since then, he had indoctrinated ten others into the mysteries of grendel flesh.
    "The First Church of the Grendel," Jessica had laughed. Aaron had barely smiled.
    The kettle was bubbling now, and would soon be ready. He added a few handfuls of mushroom-looking things, and something that looked like a fern. She nervously contributed her own handful, a few leaves pruned from one of Cadmann's living room cacti. Poisonous, yes. But in very precise combination with certain plants, and the liver of a grendel that had died on speed . . .
    She watched the stars. The same, but different stars from those beneath which her ancestors had lived and died, loved and hunted, fought and borne children. But they were her stars. The way to survive is to become one with the environment. The Earth Born still saw Avalon as a place of strangeness, of danger. Every one of them would have to die, the things of Earth would have to die before this planet could be truly conquered. And this ritual, as old as humanity, was the prayer of the hunters and gatherers whose lives were interwoven with the land itself. The Earth Born had come as the Europeans to the new world. Aaron said that they would have to learn the traditions of the Native American peoples in order to survive here. They could not own the land, but they could be a part of it.
    Aaron dipped a cup into the brew, and lifted it steaming to his lips. "To us," he said. "To the children of a new world."
    He drank. When he was finished, he passed the cup to the left, and the ritual was repeated, and again, until all of them had downed a mouthful of the sour mash.
    It smashed into her gut like napalm. She broke into a sweat, her heartbeat rocketing.
    For a few foolish moments she prayed that nothing would happen this time . . . then her stomach soured, and she knew there was no use in hoping. It had begun.
    During the first grendel ceremony, she had vomited. Since then Aaron had incorporated acid neutralizers and buffering agents, and now the entire experience was, at least physically, much milder.
    The psychoactive alkaloids were kicking in now. External sounds were fading. It was not that they weren't there, or that she had gone deaf, it was that her focus of attention was so tight now, so utterly complete that it was as if she was staring down a long, long tunnel. There at the far end were the simmering kettle and the fire. And if she turned the focus of her attention on Aaron, she saw Aaron, and only Aaron, and if she looked up at the stars and the night sky, she could focus on any point of light, bring it up bright and tight, a hot little marble that she could almost hold in her hand. Aaron's voice crooned to her, sounding for all the world like the music of those very spheres:
    "We are the inheritors of this world. We own all of this, everything that we can see, everything that there is to own. We are the strong ones. The others call us Merry Pranksters. We do what we do to test our power. To ensure that we can control every aspect of this planet. And then we place a clown's face upon our deeds so that the old ones will feel no fear.
    "But one day we may have to take other steps. And when we do we will have to act as one mind, as one body. As the inheritors of this world, with no barriers between intent and action. As one mind. As one body . . ."
    She could hear his words, felt them slipping between those bright hot marbles. She was burning up, but sought refuge in the very fire that consumed her. Aaron's hands were on her. And then other hands. And then she was reaching, touching, tasting, consuming and allowing herself to be consumed in the fire raging within her, without her, and in the space between those bright, hot marbles in the sky.


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 11

INVISIBLE DEATH

Death hath so many doors to let out life 
-JOHN FLETCHER, The Custom of the Country

    The children and their guardians were not quite alone. Above them was Geographic. In geosynch over Camelot, Geographic maintained a web of satellites across the continent and around the planet, and kept careful track of weather and tidal conditions. Geographic, the largest movable object ever created by man, had carried its cargo of frozen human beings across ten light-years, expending a cubic kilometer of deuterium snowball along the way. The deuterium was exhausted now. Its sleeve was a shrunken silver balloon, the pressure inside barely higher than the vacuum around it.
    Geographic could still be moved by smaller steering rockets, but until the deuterium was replaced-if it ever was-she would remain in eternal orbit around Avalon. She was their link to Earth, and the Earth Born insisted that all of their children be taken up. "This is your heritage. You call yourselves Star Born, now see the stars."
    A few came back as often as they could. Some of the Second still dreamed of crossing the void between the stars. A few even spoke of returning to Earth. For the most part, though, the children of Earth were rare visitors. Geographic's corridors were empty, cold, and dark, with only a few flickering lights to give any sign that she had once been alive.
    In the command center, the duplicate of the ground-based Cassandra system analyzed a planet's worth of data. She filtered it, and relayed down whatever seemed of interest.
    Greg Arruda looked up from his novel as the comm light came on. "Arruda here." 
    "Zack. How are things?"
    "Jesus Christ, Zack, they're the way they were the last time you asked." He looked at the console. "The board's green. No large objects approaching the oasis. Children all accounted for at last head count. Wait one-" 
    "What?"
    "No panic, Zack. Yellow light from one of the close-in satellites. There's a wind coming up. Northwest wind, about thirty knots through the pass." 
    "Rain? Rain means grendels!"
    "Ah . . . indicators say dry. Way dry, suck the water right out your pores. Zack, for God's sake, you worry too much. Let the kids have some time to themselves. And get to bed! I'll call you if there's anything you need to know." 
    "Yeah. Greg, I know you think I'm a fussy old woman-hell, you were there, you remember grendels."
    "No, they slipped my mind for a good twenty seconds there. Zack, get to sleep."

    Linda woke as Cadzie shifted in his blanket to search for a nipple. Half-asleep she cooed to him, and peeled back her blouse. Drowsily suspended between dream and reality, she didn't really wake up until Cadzie was sated. The morning was still dark. Light would creep across the glade in another twenty minutes.
    Joe was still asleep, his strong, broad back to her. The regular rise and fall of his breathing was absurdly comforting.
    They made a good team. They worked together well, and they played together well. And love was . . . every bit as good. It felt whole, healing. She could easily imagine being with this man for the rest of her life. As soon as she could be away from Cadzie for a day or two, she was going to take Joe down the Miskatonic, in the wedding ritual as old as Camelot himself. All the way down to the ocean, there would be camping, and cuddling, and long, slow, warm lovemaking, and it would be . . . wondrous.
    She wrapped the infant in a blue blanket, covering all but his nose. She opened the door of the dirigible, and stretched in the breeze. She felt utterly content.
    Joe had come up silently behind her and was kissing the back of her neck. Dawn was coming in now, darkness already giving way to a warm, silvery glow. The air was no longer still. Ginger and Toffee, the twin golden retrievers, were still asleep, curled up next to each other near the dead fire. There were buzzing sounds and distant calls of pterodons, and even more distant hisses, calls of the monkey-things and the imitative calls of the big spider devil that hunted them.
    She turned and kissed Joe. His morning breath was sour but not unpleasant. She handed Cadzie over, patted Joe on his rump, and went to wash and dress, girding her mind for the day's business.
    By the time Linda climbed down from Robor, Joe was already roughhousing with Ginger, pretending to bite her throat, growling and barking at her. He gathered up Cadzie and gave Linda a minty kiss. The two of them crossed the glade, dogs nipping at their heels. She never noticed that all the creature sounds of Avalon had gone away.
    The machinery within the corrugated refinery shack was burnt and twisted and scummed with pink fire foam. Linda placed her drowsy son just outside the shack, in the waxing sunlight. Ginger curled up next to Cadzie like a big cat. Dog warmth, and the heat of his blue thermal blanket, would keep the boy comfortable until Tau Ceti climbed a little higher.
    Joe was still examining the equipment when she returned. He looked utterly disgusted. "Morning light doesn't improve it much, does it?"
    "Not a bit. Let's go ahead and make the report." She touched her collar. "This is Linda Weyland, at station three. Who's on duty?"
    A second or two of silence, and then they got their reply. "Edgar here. Hi Dad, Linda. Nobody else around yet. Ready to report?"
    Joe sighed. "Frankly, I think that we should trash it and rebuild." 
    "Except that it might happen again," Edgar said. 
    "There's that. Edgar-" 
    "Yes, sir?"
    "Oh hell, of course you don't know anything you're not telling us," Joe said.
    "They don't tell me everything," Edgar said. "Aaron doesn't much care for me, and the others-do you still think it's sabotage?"
    "No," Joe said carefully. "I'll say that for the record. After examining the damage here at the minehead, it is my considered opinion that we don't have the foggiest notion what happened. It's another goddam Avalon Surprise." 
    The wall shuddered as the wind howled against the shack. "Bloody hell, that wind's come up strong," Joe said. 
    Linda stepped out to fold the blanket over Cadzie's face.
    "Sorry, Edgar," she said. "We're picking up a little wind here."
    "What?" 
    "Wind."
    "Roger, we see that. There's a storm coming southeast over the mountains. Dry wind, no danger from grendels, but is Robor secure?" 
    "Very."
    Ginger growled, coming to point. She looked off toward the west. Toffee was fifteen feet away, staring in the same direction. They began to bark, yapping against the growing wind. A dry wind, hot. It dried her skin faster than she could sweat.
    "Joe? That wind is really coming up. Double-check the moorings, will you? And get a wind warning down to Heorot."
    Joe dropped a length of singed tubing, and grunted in disgust. "You know that they're off-line. We can get them in an emergency, but that's about it."
    "All right-well, I hope they've got the skeeter sheltered." 
    "You know Justin. But I'll go make a check." 
    Linda kissed Joe, and he looked almost surprised. "I'm just going to Robor," he murmured against her lips. 
    "Do I need a reason these days?" she asked.
    "Never." He kissed her again, and started off across the glade.
    "Will you guys stop the mush?" Edgar said disgustedly.
    "No respect," Linda clucked. "Remember-I'm going to be your mother one day soon."
    "Hey. You know, one of a mother's duties is to find mates for her offspring." 
    "I told you what to do about that problem." 
    "Sure. I'll keep trying. Linda, Dad says it wasn't sabotage. You agree?" 
    "Yes." 
    "Say that again?"
    "Yes! I agree it was not sabotage. Edgar, that wind is really howling now, it's getting hard to hear." She put her hand across her nose in a vain attempt to filter the dust. "It's as if the coal had little flecks of dynamite-" She stopped. Some creature was howling in torment. 
    "What's that?" Edgar shouted.
    "I don't know-" Across the clearing, the dogs were leaping and biting-at the dust. Joe slapped at his chest and neck and face. At first she thought it some kind of joke . . . some kind of crazy dance.
    The wind was stronger now, driving a wall of dust before it. She coughed and stepped out of the shelter, trying to see more clearly. Her smile was dead on her lips, her laughing questions stillborn in her throat. "Joe . . . " And then she screamed.
    "Linda? Dad?" Edgar's voice sounded urgent. "Alert! All stations alert! Base Two is in trouble!"
    She was blind before she quite realized that she was in trouble. Agony shrieked in her eye sockets, and she slapped her hands up to cover them. Blood slicked her palms, she felt the hollows where her eyes should have been, and the backs of her hands were being shredded.
    The world was consumed with agony. The wind roared in her ears. She had time to scream "Joe!" and then the pain was at her lips, her 'tongue, and she was gagging on blood. Some mass staggered into her, and she knew it was Joe, darling Joe, loving Joe, groaning like a thing that had never known human consciousness. The dogs' barking had transformed into an endless, pain-racked howl.

    In Camelot, bedroom alarms shrieked, and the streets were filled with sprinting bare feet. Hastily armed grendel guns pointed in all directions, and found nothing. There was no threat to be seen.
    By now the image from Satellite 16 was being piped through Geographic, enhanced, and relayed to Camelot's communications center. The image was expanded again, and then again, until it seemed the scene was no more than a hundred yards distant . . . but it was all a blur, just textures shifting through fog.
    Hendrick Sills was first into the center. "What's the alarm, Edgar?"
    There was panic in Edgar's voice. "I thought it was a dust storm! They come through there regular, no problem, but the dogs started barking and Linda was screaming and now I can't hear anything, and I can't see anything, and my God!" 
    "Get hold of yourself," Zack said. "Dust storm. Rain?" 
    "No, no rain, it's a dry hot wind, sirocco wind. Stronger than they usually get, but-Zack, I can't hear anything. They were screaming, and now they don't answer! What do I do?" 
    "Keep watching. Can you zoom in?" 
    "Trying. There, the dust is thinning out-" 
    The image focused. Edgar's voice dropped to a whisper. "Oh, my God." Two human shapes and a dog shape were writhing on the ground. "Dad! Linda!"
    The wind howled, and under the wind they could hear a baby's wail. The image cleared for an instant. Shapes thrashed, slowed, then faded into a fog of blowing dust. Someone muttered a prayer; then the room was still. Half a world away, two people that they knew and loved were dying in agony, and there was nothing that they could do to help.

    Linda was beyond pain. She felt her eyes eaten away, the flesh etched from her bones.
    With the very last strength in her body, her blood-slicked fingers closed on Joe's misshapen, lifeless hand. And her last thought was Cadzie . . .
    She heard her baby crying, crying, crying . . . 
    And then there was nothing at all.


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 12 

PARADISE LOST

Nature is usually wrong.
-JAMES ABBOTT MCNEILL WHISTLER, Ten O'clock

    Jessica snuggled next to Aaron in their sleeping bag. She was only half awake until the whitter of skeeter blades roused her from her reverie.
    She had barely wedged her eyes open in time to see it thump to ground, landing too damn fast. Justin leapt out, and ran toward them. "Emergency, dammit!" he screamed. He was bare-chested, wearing only briefs. A surge of adrenaline whiplashed her into wakefulness. Aaron was already scrambling to his feet.
    All right, so Camelot had gotten nervous. This wasn't the first time the Star Born had taken themselves off line. She knew that they'd catch hell for that one day, and just maybe that day had come . . .
    She struggled her clothes on, and hopped out toward the skeeter. Sprawled around the dead fire, the other Pranksters were hauling themselves toward consciousness. 
    "What's the problem?"
    Justin looked pale. "Edgar rang through. He was on-line with Linda and Joe. They got cut off. Move it!" 
    The piled into the skeeter. Aaron had time to yell "Trouble at Deadwood!" to Toshiro, who was up and pulling on a knit shirt. "We're going up. Get back to camp and watch the Scouts. Set a defensive perimeter. Keep them back in the cave. Interlocking fields of fire and no mistakes."
    "Got it."
    Jessica buckled in. "Any sounds, messages, images at all?" she asked.
    "Screams," Justin said tightly. "Just screams." 
    "Anything on the motion sensors? The thermals?" 
    Unbidden, Edgar's voice came over the radio. "Nothing. We've got Sat Twelve locked on, and I don't see anything. I think they're dead."
    They rose up out of the glade, in toward Heorot. There they dropped down for a moment. Jessica and Aaron took the other skeeter, and she had them airborne in fifteen seconds. Their ascending spiral twisted the glade, the valley, and the surrounding mountains into a dizzying whirl.
    No one spoke as the skeeters leveled out and dove, crossing the two kilometers to the camp in about ninety seconds. Robor's Chinese-dragon shape leered up at them, its red fringes rippling slowly in the wind. 
    There was nothing. Nothing . . . 
    And then Jessica whispered, "Oh dear God." Bones. Human bones. Animal bones. Aaron said, "I see three skeletons. Two human. One canine." His voice still held a machine precision. He was speaking for Cassandra, for Edgar back at Camelot. For whoever might have tapped into the line, and was now sick with concern.
    Her mind reeled. Grief and fear and raw hatred boiled within her like lava. Her vision clouded. She gripped the handbar in front of her as if a moment's loss of concentration would tumble her off the edge of the world.
    Justin's voice was arctic. "What do you see on the movement sensors? Any thermal flares?" 
    "Nothing." 
    "Nothing," Aaron agreed.
    Justin's voice was labored. He sounded like some kind of animal straining in a trap. "I don't see any sign of the baby. Of Cadzie."
    A trapdoor opened in the back of her mind. She felt herself slide a little ways down, then clawed her way back up. What waited at the bottom of that pit bore fangs and claws, and was ravenously hungry.
    "No sign. Not yet." And what she didn't say, what she couldn't say, was Cadzie is barely a mouthful for a grendel.
    They hovered almost directly over the glade. Skeletons. The mining dome. A dozen yards distant, the refinery shack. The dirigible. And that was all.
    Aaron snapped out the trance first. "Cassandra, replay Sat Twelve, during or just prior to the incident." 
    Jessica slipped on a pair of goggles, and watched while the images played. Running, struggling. A dusty windstorm. Death.
    Bones.
    "Oh, sweet Jesus," Jessica muttered. "That was no grendel."
    "It wasn't anything." Aaron was shaken. "It was invisible."

    Camelot was awake, and gathering in the main hall.
    Carlos tore at a scrap of ragged flesh at the corner of his thumb. The satellite feed kept playing it over and over again, enhanced with thermals, to full magnification, giving the illusion that the couple was no more than a hundred meters away.
    Impossibly far away. A world away.
    Justin's voice came over the speaker. "This is Skeeter Two. We are holding at seventy feet. We see skeletons. There's nothing alive down there that we can see. Nothing we can do to help them. Need instructions."
    Zack touched his collar. "Moskowitz. Did you say skeletons?"
    "Yes, sir. Two human skeletons. One canine," Aaron said.
    Zack was unnaturally calm. "We copy that. Skeletons. Satellite inspection detects nothing."
    "Motion sensors detect nothing," Aaron said. "And we see nothing--wait one. There is a small skeleton in the rocks about twenty meters above the camp." 
    "Human?"
    "No, sir, too small. Now I see another. There are two small skeletons. I would say Joeys from the size."
    "You say there's nothing to be done for Joe and Linda?" 
    "That's my best judgment," Aaron said. "And there's no sign of the baby. "
    Zack looked around. "Where's Colonel Weyland?" 
    "On the way." 
    "Hold off on landing for a minute, please." 
    There was no answer. "Please continue reports," Zack said. More colonists streamed into the hall, their voices a roiling cacophony. 
    "Wha--" 
    "The hell--" 
    "Will somebody tell me--" 
    "Who's up there--"
    Still no answer. Zack lowered his voice. "I know that you can hear me. Hold off on landing until we have an assessment--" Carlos tried to imagine what Justin was feeling now. In one sense, he couldn't possibly know. In another, he understood precisely. The entire colony was family, their lives linked as closely as the fingers of a hand. But Linda was Justin's kid sister.
    All of their lives, the Second had heard horrific stories. But a thousand stories pale in comparison to a single scream of agony.
    The crowd behind them parted as Cadmann Weyland stormed in. He was red-faced, unshaven, and flinty-eyed. His beige coveralls were wrinkled and stained, as if he had thrown on yesterday's clothes.
    He glared at the screen, his face as solid and square as stone. "What happened?"
    "Something attacked the minehead," Zack said. "No one knows what."
    The second image was a skeeter-eye view of the same scene. Skeeter ID number and pilot registration were etched at the bottom of the screen.
    "Justin," Cadmann barked. "Who's up there with you?" 
    A long pause.
    "Justin! Answer me, dammit." They didn't hear a sound at first, and then Justin's voice rang down to them. 
    "Jessica. And Aaron." Thank God, Cadmann thought. Jessica and Justin could handle their own, but Aaron Tragon was one of the best shots he had ever seen.
    "We're going down. Dad." 
    "Hold off on that. We're still sweeping the area." 
    "We don't see anything. The motion sensors don't pick anything up--"
    "They didn't pick anything up twenty minutes ago, either!"
    Mary Ann had made her way to Cadmann's side. Her face looked as if emotion had been pressed from it like oil from an olive. "Linda? Is Linda all right--"
    Cadmann squeezed her hand. "I don't think so. Justin, you're there. Do you see the baby?" 
    "Baby!" Mary Ann shouted. "Justin, go find him!" 
    "Cadmann." It was Aaron's voice this time. "You're wrong. The sensors did pick up motion before. Wind. Dust storm. Probably some kind of mineral powder, something that confused the sensors. We have to go down." 
    "Roger. Be careful. Secure Robor first." 
    "We will." 
    "Is that safe?" Zack demanded.
    "They're on the spot," Cadmann said. "And without Robor they can't get the Scouts off the mainland." 
    "Oh--"
    "Cadmann, what's happened to Linda?" Mary Ann wailed. "Justin, where's the baby!"
    "Father," Jessica said. He almost didn't recognize the voice. He had never heard his daughter sound like that before. "I don't see Cadzie." Her voice was beyond ice, somewhere out in deepest space. The clearing juddered on the wall. "Father, that's Linda down there. And Joe. They're dead. But one dog is missing, and I don't see Cadzie. "
    He was searching for something to say. What hope was there for his grandson's survival? Almost none. And yet, if there was any chance at all . . . 
    "All right," he whispered. "We'll keep watch from here." Then he turned, and held Mary Ann. When it came right down to it, there was really nothing else to do.

    Justin watched Jessica touch down without a bump, taking that last couple of inches as carefully as a man stepping onto thin ice.
    Aaron dismounted, carrying a grendel gun. Jessica bore a regular hunting rifle, its safety off.
    Justin hovered overhead, watching. He wiped his moist hands nervously on his pants. He strove to starve his imagination, to keep focused on each individual moment. Now and Now and Now, and after that, the Now to come.

    One careful step at time, Jessica and Aaron Tragon crossed the twenty feet between the autogyro and the skeletons. After each single footstep, she stopped to sense her surroundings. There was no sound except the steady shoop shoop of Justin's skeeter blades above them.
    Aaron's gaze locked with hers for a cold moment, and then slid past. Neither of them was willing or able to speak. Her heart thundered loudly in her ears.
    Three skeletons--two human and one canine--lay in a rough circle of flattened grass, as if they had thrashed around crazily, fighting, maybe. Fighting what? Where were their clothes? Could they have come running out naked? Naked but with sandals on . . . and Joe's hat, but not Linda's woven straw bonnet.
    Aaron kicked over a small rock that lay beneath the smaller skeleton: Linda's, the one with no hat. There was a tiny bloodstain under the rock.
    "No blood," Aaron said. "Little spots like this, but no blood! How long since--the attack started?"
    "Twenty-eight minutes since we heard the skeeter alarm," Justin said.
    Aaron looked around warily, rifle at the ready, but there was nothing to shoot at. "And it was all over before we got here."
    Jessica couldn't move her eyes away from the three skeletons. The bones were stripped bare of clothing and of meat, but all were in place, as when an archeologist opens a grave. Nothing had broken or scattered the bones. She picked up Joe's hat and rubbed it in her fingers. Inside the brim it looked etched, or chewed.
    Bones stripped of cloth, of meat, of sinew, ready to be mounted for biology class. Eyeless sockets glared up at her. Something gleamed. "Linda's chain," Jessica said. She pointed. A chain of tiny gold links encircled the neck of one of the skeletons. The next thing she knew she was bent over, stomach contracting violently. She felt it squeeze and pump, heard her own gagging sounds as from a distance, as if that other part of her were above the glade, watching as the tall blond woman tried to turn herself inside out. Aaron laid a comforting hand on her shoulder. She very nearly hit him. She wiped her mouth with the back of her hand. No time for emotions, you sniveling bitch. 
    "Cadzie," she whispered. 
    "What?"
    "He's got to be here somewhere. Whatever did this was in a feeding frenzy. It wouldn't have taken him somewhere else." 
    Stripped clean. Plucked bare. 
    "Where's the other dog?"
    "Hope to God it ran away. Ran far enough." They headed toward the mining shack.
    Her collar buzzed. It was Justin. "What do you see?" 
    "It's Linda and Joe and one dog."
    Aaron's voice was flat. "We're going over to the processing plant. The . . . door's open. Still no sign of the baby. Continue to record." 
    "Be careful," Justin said. 
    "Right."
    Jessica was ahead of him, rifle at the ready. The ground was bare, not even dust. Jessica stopped short and pointed.
    "Another small skeleton," Aaron said carefully. "Probably an immature Joey."
    Jessica reached the processing plant. The door was open. There was an aroma of burnt plastic within, and an ancient, oily musk. The door creaked on its hinges as she pushed it back.
    The interior was deeply shadowed. Slivers of light slanted through holes in the roof. Her breath sounded like slow thunder.
    "Nothing," she reported. "There isn't any sign of . . ." She spun at a sudden clatter behind her. Wind against the corrugated steel door. There was nothing, nothing here at all. She heard Aaron's voice from outside. "You had better come here."
    Her heart was a stone in her chest. She went outside, dreading what she was about to find.
    Aaron closed the door. Behind it was the skeleton of the missing dog. Next to it was a bundle in a blue blanket. It made a coughing sound, and began to cry.
    Jessica watched motionless as a tiny pink fist thrust out of the blanket and waved, more fiercely now, crying, calling for a mother who would never come. "He's alive!" she shouted. She touched the collar button, then changed her mind. Instead she ran to pick up the baby.
    Cadzie clutched at her. She dropped his deep blue blanket in the dust and held him at arm's length. Cadzie was furious. Cadzie was--
    She hugged him with her left arm so she could touch her collar button. "Cadzie is alive! Dad, you hear? He isn't even marked!"
    "We have found the baby," Aaron said. "He is apparently unharmed."
    "Tragon, this is Weyland." Her father's voice, flat and unemotional, came from her collar tab. "Would you repeat that?"
    "Yes, sir. We have found the baby. Jessica is holding him. He appears to be alive and unharmed." ' 
    "Thank you. Advice." 
    "Yes, sir."
    "Jessica, get the baby into the skeeter and stand by. Aaron, we've got good photographs. Grab anything you think might help us understand this and get out of there." 
    "Sounds good to me." Aaron nudged Jessica. "Go to the skeeter. I'll cover you," he said. "Get inside and close the doors."
    She nodded vigorously. She wanted to run, but she was afraid she would drop Cadzie. It felt good to be in the familiar skeeter seat.
    "Justin, do you see anything?" Aaron asked. 
    "Nothing on either side of the pass."
    "Then I'll chance gathering the bodies," Aaron said. "But I don't get it. Something hit this camp. Fast and hard. Killed everything. Except a baby. It couldn't find a child wrapped in a blanket." 
    "Maybe it wasn't hungry by the time it got to Cadzie." 
    "No, that's not it," Aaron said. "It stripped a dog next to him, right down to the bones."
    "Aaron, this is Zack. We think you should get out of there. You can gather evidence later."
    "Agreed." Aaron ran across the dry ground to the skeeter and leaned in. "Give me five minutes, Jessica. Freeze Zack---I've got something important to do."


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 13

EVACUATION

A monster fearful and hideous, vast and eyeless.
-VIRGIL, Aeneid

    Carey Lou was afraid. There was something wrong, and no one would talk about it. They were all calm. Too calm, so calm that their very lack of emotional expression terrified him.
    Each skeeter could carry three children and one adult pilot, and under three guards, the children were escorted back up. Carey Lou was in the third group, and maybe six times he asked the same question. "What's wrong? Is something wrong?" And received no answer. Finally Aaron Tragon, big Aaron, his buddy, looked at him, his eyes like glass. Carey Lou almost felt afraid in that moment. Not of grendels or of some other bogey being out in the jungle, but of Aaron himself.
    That, of course, was crazy.
    So he asked no more questions as they carried load after load of children back up the mountain, and when it was his turn he didn't question, had run out of questions, and wanted only to squeeze into his seat, and make himself small.
    Justin piloted the skeeter, for which Carey Lou was grateful. Whatever was going on, Justin knew about it. He could tell in the rigid set of his shoulders.
    The skeeter spiraled into the air. Ordinarily he loved flying. But this time there was no joy. There was nothing but fear.
    Why won't they tell us . . . 
    What's wrong . . .
    They circled Robor. There were two pairs of guards on each side, facing away from the craft, grendel guns at the ready.
    Their expressions just about froze his heart.
    He had thought that Robor looked funny, almost comical. A big grendel. A big dragon, the biggest that ever lived. But there was nothing funny about it now. They landed behind the two guards, and were immediately whisked into Robor's shadow by Jessica, who looked almost as pale and emotionless as Justin.
    Again he was struck with the contrast. Jessica and Justin looked scared. Aaron looked . . . intrigued?
    They ushered him up the gangplank, and into the hold, and he went to the nearest knot of kids and lowered his voice, asking, "Does anyone know what's going on?" 
    He found Heather, who tried to smile in memory of a magic evening. She looked as frightened as he felt. "Something's wrong," she whispered. "Somebody's dead." 
    Carey Lou went to the front window and pressed his palms against the glass. Who? Who was dead . . .
    He remembered who had stayed behind. With her baby. The room swam.

    "What in the hell was it? I won't believe in invisible grendels!" Cadmann squeezed his eyes shut, and massaged his temples with stiff fingers. There was a monster of a headache coming on. They'd seen every kind of grendel, and he was far too close to believing in this one, too.
    There was a numb sensation in his chest, something spreading as if he had been struck there. He wanted to scream, to foam, to throw something . . . to do anything but sit here and wait. Wait as they received sketchy video broadcasts of skeeters relaying children back to the Robor. Wait, and pray to a half-forgotten God. "Not everything on this freezing planet is a grendel," Cadmann said, tasting the thought. It felt right: real. "We don't have any idea of what's really here. We've got to stop acting like grendels are the be-all and end-all of lethality."
    Hendrick grabbed his arm. "What in the hell are you talking about?"
    "We've been afraid of grendels," Cadmann said. "To that extent, we've probably blinded ourselves to what is actually out there . . . over there. We never went and looked for ourselves, and I think that the grendels became a kind of bogeyman." The screens showed Robor taking off now, safe. Safe from what lived in the ground.
    Have they gathered her bones? he asked himself. God. I hope they gathered her bones. But of course they would. Jessica would insist and Aaron would have done it. Thank God Aaron was there.
    He felt numb. Doors were slamming in his mind, and behind them raged fear and grief.
    If he wasn't careful, a door might creak open. Behind one of them was Linda's birth. Such a small, wrinkled, bulbous thing she had been. And his first touch, his first scent of her . . . she would have been a breech birth, but for the prenatal diagnostics, and God . . . 
    He slammed that door in his mind, and the one with invisible grendels behind it too. Pure horror fantasy. You'd have to be crazy . . . Came up, hearing the hubbub in the room . . . 
    . . . and then sank down again, fighting as his eyes grew hot, and then flooded, all of his efforts to keep his tears under control as futile as their attempts to tame this fucking planet.
    It was no good. None of it was any good, and he had to leave the control room, which had grown crowded.
    The news had to have reached every corner of the camp by now. Razelle Weyland would be flying in from the lumber preserves, and her brother Michael from over at the slope camp. People were looking at him with an emotion in their faces that he had never seen there before: Pity. Shock. They wanted to touch him, to comfort him, but with every step he felt the shields sliding down, even as the shields around his heart crumbled.
    The images were coming so fast, too fast, as if there were twenty years of tension, twenty years of fear stored up inside of him, and now that it had clawed free and claimed his youngest, there was nothing to hold back the pain anymore, and then . . . 
    He saw her, running up to him. Linda was just a baby, and her round and shining face, the diapers bunched up between her chubby thighs, her little chubby arms outstretched to him, her smile stretching that round little face. Her eyes so blue, her mother's eyes.
    He held out his hands to her, stretched out his arms. Stretched his arms across the table, his fists closed hard on the edge, his good ear pressed flat against wood, eyelids like tiny fists closed hard around red-hot embers.

    The trip back to the island was subdued. The children were wrapped in blankets. Some of them cried. All knew, by now, what had happened to Linda and Joe.
    Jessica came to sit next to him. Justin looked at her, and she felt the oddest sensation from him. Almost as if he were a stranger, rather than her brother. His eyes weren't hot, or cold. They were just eyes. Black holes, gathering data.
    Justin's hand strayed over and over again to his pistol, palm resting on it as if death might follow them into the air, come aboard Robor and follow them back to Camelot.
    "Where were you?" he asked quietly.
    "You know where," she said. 
    "Pranksters," he said.
    "Justin-even if I had been there, right there, I couldn't have done anything." 
    "Of course."
    "Justin-she was my sister too! Don't shut me out. Please." 
    "She shouldn't have been there alone." 
    "She was not alone. She was with Joe!"
    "You're right. You're right." He wiped his hand over his face. And for the first time that she could remember, Jessica hadn't the slightest idea what was going on behind her brother's eyes. Was he blaming her? Himself? Imagining what he was going to say to Father? Was he thinking of the bones in the hold, all that remained of their baby sister?
    She reached out to him, touched him gently on his shoulder, and was absurdly happy when he didn't brush her hand away.
    Aaron came up behind her. "Jessica," he said, "I need to talk to you."
    She was torn between Justin and Aaron for a moment. Then she smiled almost apologetically, and said, "I'll be right back."
    Justin's gaze slid coldly from Jessica to Aaron and back again, and then he nodded, so shallowly that it was almost no motion at all. And then, in some way that she couldn't completely explain, Jessica knew what Justin was thinking. 
    And feeling.
    She knew it, but couldn't quite make the thought rise up to consciousness.
That might have hurt a little too much.

    The entire colony was on the beach as Robor floated into the bay. Cadmann drew his coat collar up around his jaw. The cold seemed more piercing somehow, as the mist rolling in off the ocean penetrated coat and shirt and skin. Around him, radios crackled. A dozen rifles were held in crossed arms.
    Perhaps Death is aboard the Robor, he could almost hear them thinking. It was what he wondered. It was the fear that had lurked just beneath the surface of their loves and growths and actions, every day for twenty years. And now it had come home to roost.
    The air was filled with the ocean's steady, rolling roar, the crackle of the radios, and no other sound at all. Then they heard the purr of skeeter engines. Out of the fog loomed Robor, like some great mythical beast bearing its dreadful, beloved cargo. Its gigantic red lips glistened in the mist. As soon as the lines dropped, colonists chased after them to tie them to the docking loops.
    The mood was dark, probably the worse he had seen since . . . 
    Remember Ernst, Cadmann . . . ?
    His memory didn't want to go over it again. And over it, and over it.
    Someone yelled an instant before one of the docking lines slapped across his face, smashing his head back. His hands flew up to fend off the blow. His hands clasped the flagging rope as he pulled. His hands and shoulders ached. As Stevens and Carlos lent their weight to his line he reached up a trembling hand to feel his right cheek. His fingers came away bloody, and he said something ugly.
    Robor touched down. The rampway opened.


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 14 

THE TRIAL

I, John Brown, am now quite certain that the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away but with blood.
-JOHN BROWN, Last Statement

    There had never been much need for a formal courtroom. Most problems were handled in a counselor's office. Really severe cases, such as the time years before when Harlan Masters tried to horsewhip Carlos, were decided in the council meeting room off the main assembly hall.
    It wasn't a very large room. Seven First Generation, four men and three women, sat at a dinner table with their backs to a bright window, so that it was hard for Jessica to see their faces. Everything had been done in a stilted formal manner that she wasn't used to. Like something out of an old Earth novel.
    "Do you have anything to say in your defense?" 
    She couldn't even tell who had asked that. Probably her father. No one had slept for almost forty-eight hours, so that all the voices sounded alike, unbearably weary. The forensic reports, diagnostics on the mining apparatus, the computerized clarification of the death scene, depositions from each Biter and Scout . . . all of these had taken their toll.
    "Yes," she said. "We were out of contact. I'm not going to lie to you about that. I know that it was against the rules." 
    "And what were you doing while you were out of contact?" 
    "I don't see what that has to do with my sister's death." 
    Cadmann's fingers were folded carefully, and he looked up and down the panel. "We are attempting to determine the cause of the disaster. Your delayed reaction time may well have been a contributing factor. If some of you had stayed behind, or been closer, or responded to your radio links . . . " 
    "What are you insinuating?"
    "They might have tried to call you on their comm links!" Cadmann half stood. "She was your little sister. You should have looked out for her!" 
    "The camp was secured, dammit!"
    "Yes," Cadmann sat back down. "It certainly was. I ask you again, what were you doing?"
    We were sleeping it off, and I am damned if I'll tell you that. "We slept late. Grendel Scout graduation runs late, and there's an orgy after the ceremonies." She said that defiantly. "We weren't scheduled to be back earlier." 
    "You're right, of course," Cadmann said. "But it's a damn shame. More eyes, more rifles, you might have done something."
    "Do you think that hasn't tortured me ever since we saw--what we saw?" she demanded. "Colonel, I plead guilty to the childish prank of being out of communication, but the fact is that we couldn't have got there in time to do or see anything to begin with." 
    "She's right," Zack said.
    Silence. Somewhere outside, a tractor coughed to life. Zack said, "Can you think of anything else we ought to know? Thank you. That is all, for now."
    Jessica looked defiantly from one of them to the other, and then lowered her voice. "No one here lost more than I did. No one. I loved her, dammit. Every time I close my eyes, I see her face, and I ask myself: Was there something I should have done? Is there anything I forgot? Is there . . . " 
    "Thank you, Jessica," Zack repeated. "I think that will be all. For now."
    Jessica stared at Cadmann as if she was expecting him to say something else. Something more--anything more. She turned, and left the room.
    Cadmann fought to keep himself focused on the moment. But it was all he could do to keep his mind away from that terrible moment when the oilcloth was carried down from Robor, and he had unwrapped it, carefully, gingerly, as if what lay within it could still be wounded by human effort.
    One set of those bones had been his youngest daughter. The other, one of his oldest friends.
    He had only known Joe Sikes for, what . . . ? A hundred and twenty years? And there was a thing that stood between them, but they'd recovered from that . . .

    "This is an inquest, not a formal trial," Zack announced carefully. "I do warn you that anything said here may be used as evidence in a trial if this board of inquiry decides to file formal charges. Do you understand this?" 
    "Yes, sir." 
    "State your name."
    "Aaron Tragon." There was the faintest hint of a smile at the corners of his mouth. This was all being recorded, and there was no chance that Cassandra didn't know who he was, but the rules said that you state your name to begin formal hearings.
    "Aaron Tragon, you were in charge of the children's expedition."
    "No, sir. Justin was in charge. I was second-in-command," Aaron said carefully.
    "Why do the younger Scouts say you were in charge, then?" Zack asked.
    Aaron shook his head. "I guess because we don't make a big thing of it," he said. "Justin and I both know what to do, and it never came to any conflicts, so I suppose the kids didn't know." 
    "Or care?"
    "Yes, sir, or care," Aaron said. "I'm sorry sir, but it just wasn't a big deal."
    "All right, I can understand that. But you were second-in-command. You were aware that the communications cards had all been turned off?" 
    "Yes, sir." 
    "Why?" 
    "It was a tradition." Aaron said. "Maybe a silly one, but--this is Graduation Night, something we Seconds do, and--"
    "And you don't need no stinking First listening in?" Carlos prompted.
    Aaron nodded. "Something like that. We wouldn't put it in quite those terms."
    "You resent the First?" This was from Julia Chang Hortha, agronomist, nurse, counselor, and a minister of the Unitarian-Universalist Fellowship, the closest thing to a formal church they had.
    "Well, sometimes, ma'am," Aaron said. "Not the Earth Born so much as all the rules." 
    "Rules are important," Zack said automatically.
    "Sure they are, for--" Aaron cut himself off. "Yes, sir, under many circumstances rules can be very important." 
    "But not for you?" Cadmann asked carefully.
    "Not always for us, no sir. Colonel, we are of age in any civilization you had on Earth. Full voting citizens entitled to full rights, including the right to live under laws we have consented to. Aren't we?"
    Everyone in the room knew what Aaron hadn't said: "laws made by people in full possession of their faculties, not by those with ice on their minds."
    "You have made your point," Zack said. "But the fact remains that you consented to the rules before you went to the island. Didn't you?" 
    "Well, yes. We had no choice." 
    "Consented under duress?" Carlos asked carefully. 
    "If you prefer." 
    "All right, Aaron. Tell us what happened." 
    "Yes, sir. We were awakened by a panic message from the watch officer, Edgar Sikes. That is all recorded. He told us there was trouble at the minehead. He was highly disturbed and shouting.
    "Jason, Jessica, and I took the skeeter after telling Toshiro Tanaka where we were going and instructing him to set up a complete defensive perimeter at the camp for the protection of the children." 
    "Yes. That was well done," Cadmann said. 
    "Thank you, sir. We then proceeded to the minehead. Again this is all recorded. When we arrived we saw no large animals and nothing that could have attacked the campsite. Linda Weyland and Joe Sikes were unrecognizable, identifiable only by jewelry. The dogs were mere skeletons.
    "We were hesitant to approach the site but we had no choice since there were no signs of the baby. We then found the child alive and unhurt. Jessica took the baby and locked herself in the skeeter. When she was secured there I photographed the site and recovered the human but not the animal skeletons. At your suggestion I was as brief as possible. We returned to the children's camp. We then assisted in getting everyone aboard the dirigible and returned to the island."
    "Anything you would have done differently?" Cadmann asked.
    "No, sir. By the time we got to the minehead, it was far too late for--for medical remedies. They were not merely dead but--" He put his fingers to his temples and shook his head. "Absolutely nothing we could have done would have been of the slightest use."
    "And there was no sign of what killed them? No clue, nothing?" Dr. Hortha asked.
    "None I saw. As we got closer there was--" 
    "Yes?" Zack prompted.
    Aaron's eyes drooped, he wasn't seeing Zack. "Motion. Yellow dust in a wind. Sir, I'm not sure I saw anything, and I can't find it in the satellite recordings. If it was there, it blew away before we could get close. But after we found the baby and before we left, I looked again. The dust was just the usual dust that always blows across the pass. It's a dusty place, more so because we diverted the stream away from the pass. I'm sure you all know that."
    Cadmann looked up from his papers. "Thank you, Aaron, we both know that whatever the formal chain of command, you're the real leader of the Second."
    "If so it's unofficial, sir," Aaron said. There was little expression in the face, or to the voice . . . but somewhere, back in the cave where Aaron Tragon lived, something had shifted and coiled. He was warier now.
    "We also know of a group that we call the Merry Pranksters. Now, you're either their leader, or you know exactly who is, and who's part of that group." 
    Aaron shrugged. Now his face had no expression at all.
    "And we all know that during trips to the mainland, you have private gatherings. Some of these involve the younger children and are part of the graduation ceremonies. Some do not. We haven't interfered, because it is important that you assume as many of the responsibilities of this colony as possible. Some of us understand that you really are citizens, you know." 
    "Yes, sir. And?"
    "What I want to know is . . . were you performing such a ceremony the night that my daughter was killed?" 
    "Yes, sir, we were."
    "Were you further away from the encampment than you had been directed to travel?"
    At the corner of Aaron's mouth, a muscle spasmed. "Yes, sir, we were." 
    "Were you out of radio communication?" 
    "To all but an emergency alert, yes, sir."
    "And it is conceivable that Linda might have been too confused, or in too much pain, to remember proper procedure for an emergency message."
    Aaron thought for a moment. "Yes, sir, it is possible. I might even think it likely."
    Cadmann nodded. He could respect this boy. He was a good one.
    "And you can agree that it was your duty to remain within range of the base camp, which you did not. And to remain in contact, which you also chose not to do." 
    "Yes, sir." 
    Zack interrupted. "I have another question." 
    Aaron regarded him almost as if he were an intruder. "Yes? Sir?"
    "During this period of time when you were out of communication, were you intoxicated?" 
    Aaron's eyes narrowed. "Yes, sir, we were." 
    "And the intoxicants were not on our list of . . . " Zack struggled for a word.
    "Sir. They were not on the list of recommended inebriants. But if it had been beer, or marijuana, the results would have been the same. We made a mistake. But the choice of psychoactives has nothing to do with that."
    "I disagree," Zack said. "From the very beginning, from the discovery of that eel, to the discovery of the explosions on the mainland, to the way we were pressured into this operation, to your behavior on the mainland, this entire affair has been handled in an irresponsible, childish, criminally stupid fashion."
    Aaron turned back to Cadmann. "Sir. Our actions on the mainland were disastrous as it turned out. We certainly broke rules. But normal safety precautions were taken, with the exception of radio links, and proximity. I submit to you that whatever killed Linda and Joe might well have killed anything else nearby. And in any event we weren't supposed to be up there that night or that morning. Yes, we used teacher plants and then connected with each other--" 
    Zack was unimpressed. "You mean you got high and had a sex orgy."
    Aaron didn't rise to the bait. "We put the littler ones to bed first. We chose Toshiro Tanaka to stay straight and be in charge. And while we're talking for the record here, I want that record to show that the kids were our responsibility, and we met that. Not one of them was killed or hurt. They were our responsibility. Not the people up at the mine, who would have been there even if the rest of us hadn't gone to the mainland at all." 
    "Aaron--" Julia said.
    "Yes, Dr. Hortha, I should calm down," Aaron said. "And I will. But I wanted this on the record. We met our responsibilities.
    "As to what we were doing, that is the business of the Star Born. The Second, if you like that term better. But we are all adults, and the nature of our ceremonies is no concern of you Earth Born."
    "I say it is!" Manny Halperin had been quiet until this explosion.
    "It was a spiritual ceremony, Mr. Halperin. We have the freedom to practice what we will--"
    "You got stoned and fucked your brains out!" Spittle flew from Halperin's mouth. "What the hell is so damned spiritual about that?" 
    "Do I have to answer that?" Aaron demanded. 
    "I'd appreciate it if you did," Zack said.
    Aaron paused. When he spoke all of the incredible blowtorch intensity of his will was focused onto Zack.
    "I didn't choose to come here," Aaron said, his voice so soft and low that they had to strain to hear it. "I didn't ask to be born not of woman. You brought us, and gave us a world filled with opportunity--" 
    "And dangers," Cadmann said quietly.
    "Yes." Aaron smiled. "Dangers. You brought us here, into a situation which you couldn't possibly understand, a very dangerous situation indeed. And many of you died. Did you hold a tribunal then? Did you judge each other? Did you ask each other questions about how you prayed, on those nights?"
    Damn straight we did. Cadmann wouldn't have spoken anyway--
    "How dare you question us!" Aaron thundered. "How bloody god damn dare you! We are not your possessions. And I am not your child. Not the child of any of you. You made damned certain of that, didn't you? Not one of you would give me his name. My name came from a record book. The only place I could call home, the closest one of you I have to a father, is the man whose bones I picked up out there on that pass! You think you lost something out there? So did I!" 
    "Aaron," Julia Hortha said.
    "No, ma'am, I won't calm down. Not this time! You hypocrites! You believed that because you fed us and clothed us and taught us we should be freezing grateful to you . . . well, we are. But don't tell me what god to worship, or how to worship It. It is none. Of. Your. Freezing. Business."
    He had lowered himself so that both knuckles rested on the table, and he stared directly into Zack's face.
    Then he stood up. "Of all of you, only Cadmann is a man," he said. "The rest of you can go to hell. Cadmann. You have always told me the truth. You have always spoken from your heart, not from some freezing rule book. What do you say?" 
    The entire room turned to look at Cadmann.
    He felt small. Finally he spoke. "I lost a daughter," Cadmann said. "For reasons that are still unclear. But that was an accident, a result of another of the hideous secrets this planet conceals from us. I can't hold that against you. But you agreed to follow certain procedures. And you broke your word. We are a community, and a community must have its rules. We can't break away from that." 
    Aaron seemed to be hearing beyond the words, and gave the barest of nods to Cadmann. "And so?"
    "And so," Zack said. "The mainland is off limits. There will be no human return there. Robotic probes will be devised to learn what needs to be learned. You'll help us design them. You'll help us ask the questions they will answer."
    Aaron seemed to grow dark. "We lost one of ours. Administrator. We have a right to our revenge." 
    "You have no right!" Zack exploded. "Don't you understand what you represent?"
    "We decline to represent anything! We're not your frozen fetuses anymore. We are living creatures, with our own wills, and our own needs! We are not your freezing children! WE are the future of this planet. You are its past." 
    "There will be no return."
    Aaron glared at them. He seemed to be on the verge of saying something. Then he nodded curtly. 
    "Is that all, then?" 
    "It is," Zack said.
    Aaron Tragon turned, heel-toe, and left the room.


Beowulf's Children
Chapter 15

THE VERDICT

I tell them that if they will occupy themselves with the study of mathematics, they will find in it the best remedy against the lusts of the flesh.
--THOMAS MANN, The Magic Mountain

    The clouds were gray, tinged with orange where Tau Ceti licked them from beneath, at the seventh dawn after Robor's return. A lone pterodon circled overhead, skawing mournfully to the misted cairn of Mucking Great Mountain. Its angular wings flapped somberly.
    The early light had yet to transform the fertile fields and roads and buildings of Camelot into a community. It remained a sleeping thing, and but for the four hundred people gathered in the small graveyard, it would have seemed deserted.
    The coffins were small. Not much was needed for bones. Mary Ann had asked that her child be cremated. Cadmann told her gently that that was out of the question: additional tissue tests might be needed at some future time.
    She asked that Linda be buried up on the Bluff; but every member of the colony wanted to be present for the ceremony. A compromise was reached. The ceremony was performed in the colony graveyard. Joe and Linda would be buried up on the Bluff, side by side.
    Sylvia held Cadzie, who was oddly quiet. The past week had been hard for him.
    Cadmann looked out at his friends and family, and tried to hold his voice even. "We knew what we did when we came here. We entrusted our seed, breed, and generation to a world no human being had touched. We knew that there would be grief, but also joy."
    Mary Ann clung to his arm, wan and fragile and shattered inside.
    "There has been joy here, so far from Earth. There has been--" He faltered. The words wouldn't flow. "The joy of hard work, shared by friends and family. The joy of discovery, of a new land. The joy of love and birth and growth. There is a price for everything in this life, and we thought we had paid that price."
    His vision clouded. "We were foolish enough to think that one generation can pay the way for the next. God has showed us that each must pay his own way through life. My daughter is gone. The man she loved, our friend and companion for twenty years, is gone." He looked out over the faces in the crowd. He knew each one of them. Had been present when many of them were born. This was their world . . . 
    Wasn't it?
    "By a miracle, their baby, my grandchild, was saved. We have an obligation to keep that child--" Gently, softly, he took Cadzie from Sylvia's arms. "--this child safe. He belongs to all of us now. We have . . . " The hurt was bubbling up now, faster and faster and he didn't seem to be able to get the barriers up in time to stop it. "We have to keep this world safe."
    He held Cadzie to his chest, felt the life in that small bundle. Smelled the fresh baby smell, and heard the small heart beating, and knew how close, how terribly close death had come to this small thing that he loved so dearly. Suddenly the ground had struck his knees. How had that happened? Sylvia was prying Cadzie out of his arms. His forehead struck Linda's coffin, and all of the things that he had never said, had thought that there would be time to say, boiled out of him, scorched him with their scorn, and turned all of his carefully planned words into a, miserable slurry of lies.
    And when, after a while, Sylvia and Justin helped him up, and the final words were spoken by Zack, Cadmann felt high above himself, with the pterodons, up in the clouds, watching these small, insignificant people scratching in the dirt of Avalon, burying their dead in the earth that would, too soon, receive them all.

    Aaron's den was crowded with bodies and talk, and warmed by a crackling thornwood fire. Chaka pressed his big palms against the northern window, feeling the vibration as big fat sparse drops shattered against it. Beyond the deserted beach, waves rolled and crashed as if attempting to wash all trace of Man and his words from Avalon.
    A tiny human shape rode a sliver of wood and plastic atop a black wave. Idiot. Probably showing off for the kaffeeklatsch that had not invited him.
    Chaka turned, for the thousandth time examining Aaron's living space, speculating on what it revealed about the Star born's de facto president. It was small, actually--smaller than many of the other Surf's Up dwellings. Not elaborate, or richly appointed.
    But what it was, was precise, to a degree that made Chaka vaguely uncomfortable. Aaron had designed and built it himself. Every joint of wood dovetailed into every other joint with machined precision. The couches were built into the walls, chairs fitted to tables, windows slanted to give the illusion of more room and positioned to catch the maximum of natural light.
    But there was something almost . . . what? Womblike? Aaron's lair was really a bachelor pad, without room for a cohabitant, no matter how often or intensely he might entertain overnight guests.
    He knew, for instance, that no woman had ever slept on Aaron's narrow bed. It was too narrow for lovemaking--such intimate activity invariably took place on the living-room divan. Or the floor, or the shower, or standing up in a hammock. Aaron was nothing if not a sexual athlete. The bed was almost too narrow for sleep. Even unconscious, Aaron's discipline was Spartan.
    A kitchen/dinette for meals, a living room for guests, a den for conspirators, a library for study, an exercise room for physical torture, and a bedroom for sleep, all fitted about one another like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, in perhaps two-thirds the space of the average dwelling. Odd.
    Katya made coffee at the counter along one wall, using the elaborate samovar she had installed to keep a constant supply of hot water. She seemed to be giving the conversation only half of her attention. The rest of her mind was probably evaluating the relational dynamic between Jessica and Aaron. Jessica stood next to Aaron's chair, idly fondling his hair. Not that Katya was directly interested in Aaron--any fool could see that she was in love with Justin. But a Tragon-Weyland alliance would affect Avalonian history for the next three centuries.
    The monitor next to Aaron's huge easy chair looked blank at first glance, and Chaka took a moment to study it. Pale brown, with a fine texture . . . faded ornate lettering . . . and then it leapt into focus.
    It was the Scribeveldt, that northeastern region of the continent which had never been seen except through cameras aboard Geographic. Flat and featureless, endless pampas, with one river and few streams. Chaka watched cursor points draw tracks in speeded-up motion. They made pale graceful curves that crossed each other rarely, as if something immense was trying to write messages to Geographic.
    Chaka cleared his throat and spoke to the computer screen. "Edgar, you on?"
    He was looking at the top of Edgar's head. Eyes glanced up, fell again. "Yeah."
    Trish Chance's fingers clamped on Chaka's forearm, and she swung him around into a gaudy, passionate kiss. Edgar looked up again, fighting a smile. "I'm here. I'm listening. Hi, Chaka. Hi, Trish. Enough already." 
    "Hi, Edgar," Trish sang sweetly.
    "Edgar, it's official," Aaron said, and it was suddenly clear he was speaking to them all. "No expedition to the mainland. Not even for Grendel Scout graduations. Nothing until they understand what happened." 
    "That's a quote?" Chaka asked. 
    "Condensation. Accurate, though."
    "They won't understand until we learn more," Chaka said. "And we won't learn until we've been there awhile." 
    Katya asked, "Chaka? What do you think happened?"
    Chaka shook his head. "Avalon Weird. It's a locked-room mystery. I don't have any ideas. Neither does my father." He caught Aaron's change of expression, and met his eyes. Father.
    "Your father," Aaron said, "is as likely to have ice on his mind as any other First. Your father is not closer to an answer than anyone else. They will never find out. Something killed our friends. They won't let us go until we know, and we can't know unless we go. It's a perfect dilemma." 
    "I wouldn't go that far," Chaka said. 
    "Oh? Why not?"
    Chaka sipped black coffee. "The point is, one day we will go back. This edict won't last forever." 
    "Sure, we'll outnumber them one day," Trish said.
    "I won't wait that long." Jessica stood at the wet bar where Katya waited for water to boil. There was jittery energy in her stance, in her voice. "Something killed Linda. Linda and Joe, but not the baby. How can you sleep, not knowing what did that? You say Avalon Weird, you're talking about something that almost wiped this world clean of us! I have to know what killed my sister."
    "Your father's the one who won't let us find out," Aaron said.
    Jessica nodded. "Loyalty. Dad's big on loyalty. He'll fight Zack every step, but once a decision is made--" 
    "Loyalty to the king," Aaron said, skirting sarcasm only by the blandness of his expression. "A cardinal virtue of the warrior."
    "Chaka Zulu would agree," Chaka said without a trace of irony. "Courage, obedience to the king, protection of the weak. Universals." He was already thinking in terms of robot probes. Earth's solar system had been explored by probes long before the first men set foot on Mars. Neat little multi-wheeled bugs had crawled over the faces of Mars and the outer moons. Cassandra had to have templates . . .
    "Well, we're not bound by obedience," Aaron said. "To Zack, or Colonel Weyland, or the council, or all the icebound Earth Born at once."
    "Ice, ice, ice," Chaka exploded. "Why is it always ice when the Earth Born aren't doing what we want?"
    Aaron took a moment to shape his response, and Toshiro stole that moment. "The First are not always wrong. Jessica has the scar to show, and Mack what's-his-name died--" 
    "Mack Reinecke," Chaka said. "He was a Bottle Baby too, just younger than Justin. Most of you weren't old enough to be there--"
    Aaron was listening, silent. The story would get told, no matter what he did.
    "Four of the First took us on campout," Toshiro said. "Zack Moskowitz needed exercise. Zack and Rachael, Hendrick Sills, Carolyn McAndrews. They wanted coffee. And they took eight of us, the oldest children, whoever might be big enough to carry his pack. I was eleven. At that, Trish got too tired and Hendrick had to tie her pack to his own. Made Hendrick a little surly.
    "So we made camp at night, and the next morning the First set us collecting coffee. We got bored with that, so they took over and we went exploring. An hour later we were looking at a pterodon nest. It was below us, across jagged rock cliffs.
    "We watched it until we got hungry, and then we went back for lunch. Trish told Zack. Zack told us not to go anywhere near a pterodon nest, and Hendrick backed him. Aaron, you asked Zack what he thought would happen. He didn't know. Hendrick didn't know.
    "We went off again. Mack Reinecke led us around to a place we could get down into the nest. Mack was in the nest--"
    "So was I," Aaron said. "And four eggs, way bigger than hen's eggs, and leathery. I took one."
    "Yes you did," Toshiro said. "And then one of the adults came back. We all scrambled away as best we could. The other big bird caught us coming up the rocks. That one slashed Jessica across the head and neck, a great gaudy scary slash. Aaron fought them off with rocks while the rest of us got away.
    "It took a skeeter to find Mack. He was part eaten. The pterodons knocked him off the rocks."
    "All right, Toshiro," Aaron said. "I'll even give you this. Zack and Hendrick gave us the same advice we'd give the Grendel Biters now. We acted like we had ice on our minds. We were children." 
    "So what will we do?" Katya asked quietly. 
    "Go back."
    The Second looked at each other. Nobody said anything until Chaka asked, "How?"
    Aaron shrugged. "Once we decide what we'll do, the how becomes a mere tactics and logistical detail. Are we agreed that we'll go?"
    There was a chorus of ayes, Chaka's not among them. Aaron noticed. He raised an interrogative eyebrow. "Have we a problem?"
    "Maybe," Chaka said. "Edgar is worried about the weather."
    Suddenly, Edgar's onscreen attention was theirs. "There's no doubt about it, the sun is heating up, and the local life-forms--"
    "Wow," Trish giggled. "How much? I mean if this is the end we should have a hell of a party--"
    "It's not going to cremate us, Trish!" Edgar said indignantly. "You have apocalyptic tastes." 
    "Oh," she pouted. "Sorry."
    Like hell, Chaka thought. She's playing a game, and I can't see it.
    "It's normal variance," Edgar said. "Tau Ceti has a fifty-year cycle. We're coming up on the maximum output. More energy means more variable weather. Higher winds. Weather gets less predictable . . . say, two days ahead instead of four. I've had Cassandra mark out regions on the mainland where we could get tornadoes." A map replaced Edgar's face for a long moment; then he reappeared. The Scribeveldt was an angry red. "Here in Camelot we could get hurricanes and typhoons along the north and west coast. The ecology seems to be heating up too, but you'll have to ask the Chakas about that."
    "The wild Joeys around the Stronghold have disappeared," Chaka said. "The tame Joeys were tearing up their claws trying to burrow. It was making Mary Ann Weyland crazy until she turned them loose. They burrowed in and estivated. At sea we're getting eels--"
    "Eels?" Jessica asked.
    "There've been over thirty eels since Big Mama," Chaka said. "Eels in nearly every Camelot stream. Father thinks the solar cycle is the trigger. More ultraviolet, and the eels start to spawn. Probably triggers other biological reactions too, but there isn't enough biology on this island to notice."
    "But there'll be a lot on the mainland?" Aaron asked. "Interesting. We'd better make sure Edgar is watching that, too. Edgar?"
    "Yeah. Aaron, weather problems will get serious in about four months. Tornadoes that can tear Robor to tinsel before you can say shit-oh-dear. We could do worse than to leave Robor in his nice safe hangar for the whole season. Watch the mainland from orbit, send some probes, let the First cool down for a year. We can collect so many good questions that it'll drive them crazy by the time the weather settles down."
    Chaka waited for Aaron to destroy Edgar. He was surprised when Aaron mildly said, "Sitting on our asses isn't exactly to my taste, but it certainly makes a good default option. Can you and Chaka work up some probes for the interesting mainland ecologies? Chaka, we do this right and we'll have your father foaming at the mouth." 
    "Hell, yes," Chaka said.
    "You'll work on that? Maybe you could talk to Edgar in the bedroom for a while."
    Edgar coughed, seeming almost embarrassed. "Not too long a talk, okay? I have an appointment with Toshiro." 
    Chaka waited for the criticism, and was again surprised to see Aaron nod understandingly. "This will only take a minute. The rest of us can map out a way to return to the mainland. We'll flash it to you later for comment and refinement." Edgar winked off.
    Chaka went into the bedroom and closed the door.

    The room was near silent until the monitor returned to a view of the Scribeveldt.
    "Edgar," Katya said, "could be a problem." 
    "Asset," Aaron said absently. "The secret to life is turning stumbling blocks into stepping-stones."
    "And just how do you do that?"
    His grin was pure evil. Instead of answering. Aaron templed his fingers and narrowed his eyes at Trish. "I believe that you have things to do and people to see."
    Trish grabbed her gym bag from the corner. "And places to go. On my way."
    "Oh, and Trish--you will be endearingly clumsy, won't you?"
    She took a step toward the door and stumbled, barely catching herself. She assumed her best poor-little-me expression. "I just don't know what's wrong with me today." And she was gone.
    Jessica stooped to look carefully into Aaron's eyes. "And just what are you up to?"
    "I could tell you," he said cheerfully, "but then I'd have to kill you."

    "Tsuruashi-dashi," Toshiro barked. Edgar's mind swirled. He was staggering through that twilight zone between fatigue and utter exhaustion. He'd been marching back and forth across the hard rubber gymnasium floor for what seemed like hours but couldn't have been more than fifty minutes.
    His legs were sacks of wet sand. The fire in his chest threatened to engulf him. Toshiro stood before him in white pajamas, a garment he called a gi, with a black sash knotted about the waist.
    Edgar kept his mind on that belt. His father had earned one back on Earth. Toshiro had earned his by satisfying Cassandra's kinesthetic model of a third dan karate expert. Joe Sikes had tried to interest Edgar in the formal dances, the complex and challenging stances, the terrifying strikes and kicks of Kyukushin karate. Edgar had learned only his own terrifying vulnerability. He was as likely to perform surgery on a friend as to kill with a mae-geri front kick.
    Now Joe was dead. Maybe this penance was a way of keeping a little of his father alive.
    Edgar stood in the Tsuruashi-dashi, the crane stance, balanced on his left leg, the right foot tucked up on his thigh, arms spread for balance. His calf was cramping, his toes digging into mat for balance so hard that he felt his toenails ready to rip free.
    Toshiro wasn't the laughing funster now. Not the talented guitarist, nor the avid surfer, or careful lover. When he donned that white uniform something else came out. Maybe he was channeling a sixteenth-century samurai. Or Thomas DeTorquemada. One of those fun guys.
    No mirth shone in Toshiro's eyes, but finally he acknowledged Edgar's suffering. Toshiro softened his voice momentarily. "Do you feel the similarity between this and the yoga Tree Pose?"
    Edgar's whole body trembled. Why was this so damned hard? Bruce Lee made it look easy. He was drowning in a sea of lactic acid. "I, uh . . . I have to stand on one leg?" 
    "That's the obvious answer. Look deeper." 
    The room was spinning. This asshole wasn't going to let him put his foot down until he answered! He was going to fall, crack his head, and his brains would run out on the mat. Maybe then the Shogun of Suffering would be satisfied. Edgar almost smiled to himself, appreciating the alliteration.
    Wait. Suddenly, he had the answer. "Balance," he gasped. "I have to concentrate on the same place in my body, you know, at my navel."
    "Just below your navel, and three inches in. The center of mass. In Japanese, ham. In sanscrit, Manipura. All right, bring your foot down slowly."
    Edgar nearly collapsed, almost didn't hear the polite applause from the side of the gym. He turned and saw Trish. She was dressed in a tan leotard that revealed the curves and angles of that magnificent body more than simply nudity ever could. What was she doing here? Was she here to watch him make a fool of himself? This was only his tenth lesson. It wasn't fair!
    Toshiro seemed to read Edgar's mind. "Trish asked if she could join us today. It's her fourth lesson. She's having some trouble with her stances." 
    Trouble? Trish? Hard to believe.
    She smiled at him. He wasn't certain, but it might have been the first time he had ever seen it up close. Even when stern she was just drop-dead gorgeous. But her smile was sort of sweet, and disarmingly girlish. "Do you mind?" 
    "Well, ah--"
    "I thought it might be a good idea for her to see a student who is better than she is, but not so much better that it is discouraging," Toshiro said quietly.
    I'm better than she is? At something physical?
    Suddenly, and quiet dramatically, all of the fatigue flitted away on wings of testosterone. He felt an inch taller, and his muscles--flabby and girded with fat though they were--were suddenly steel bands. Well, rubber bands. But bands nonetheless.
    She stood by his side. Taller than he by an inch, and devastatingly feminine for all of the muscle now clearly revealed to view.
    "Today you learn to teach what you know," Toshiro said. "Let her take her stance, and you make the corrections."
    "Would you?" she asked. There was no mockery in her voice, but some part of him still just couldn't believe it.
    "Zenkutsu-dachi!" Toshiro barked. Trish bent her front kughtan inch,ubent her frontle."e wa eyes. Fatady to rip free.gar's suffer chorus yes. F-hisrexpedition say shit-o" Toshiro barelchoruisuhwould be sa"
   m for  is? A belt. rn more," Chakoice mo. When e hefatigIanths. Tosu-dar proben he reational tisn, justrem his ittle-me ef himWu-dar prcks in we whakofnut no his ssThe takes We couldand the naurth lAaron,gsir. default optie in h teach whster Avahour s too narll. Finally Sffer that my dan't know. mometerte we went a fool of hsed hi eyes.  pad, withoussica ol ouFatad Pose?"
ieve thatow?"
    Aaron kaie," Chanation.cal?dare ys' of us can map oue was t my until hen e hefad.
    . "A? Hard to bu even gh e heft holero Tau evemf hiere wiZack saiduone slasht reh had neve-oh-dear. a black sash knks spread thoowt o. Thatisfu--tBaby tos canDaT didic ac. He felt an hefad. practr foot down slowlyvJse felt aent a fool o foonity, an slon we went st took u- leathhp 
    Ch.sunger "Zenkutsu-tted awae spokro e hefad.whe crane shim, sue a siithe sameyvJse f font a f," TisfiedAem oed his b mind    "But thy.
    back on Ear granua saio tys d look ue a siithlully.OsameyvJsmed tvealedhoruas only at my rish gy pld. WuspokrOating hat."
 . was r the S happenede yogr"It took gr for commErntilcolo of th." 
    wtnumberfor medit Henk f,"ts makt shim,dto gogle bneturn ssica askd knew honks tl of us nockerycks in me parof hsedflestosterone. H    "But thy.
dit sideit sideit sideit sdeit sidtep gw itthe S happenediefo'i bu even ghAgain t were. hse.read Edgand e wasybeen jidteassummovar she haJfirst , "ogle Hard to bu 'i We'd betteri?ve bee    "Fop-dead n thx and m"TrishIt took wth lhat it revean't you uike tdwer. were gullya . " ckerycks sro wadmlPose said chgger than heand trite Earth BIlupi whatitted awPtostusideit sirestions that it'll  modthe gerni She  too nerstasas pod:ught foudy, passiont wity, paso triteterone.  arc She ow."I, uh . . .atigeach s."
    "Nbrglot sts sro wat it msts ld safe.bway . Joe Sikes had twhile the resa!s. Tosss jusent so mude of the  "There'ostusidhAgain t  keep in t"rkaittlemtteredurn sfoot dwPthe Tsght us comin we ds tentthe night  tiny houth.". Joe fra modthe g    Tosusireserth leree.
   ? very lly.taller, rafe. shim,kd k,ur friendOuing svght  t wity, p to Cadmy of the ost thrhealed se from the s" shonel Whe toole bnetWwers tult opach wf. Yoy. It's hoshatls perfo words wee raised was vwd. Wuskool down fCadmaeTorqusit Tau ehe isIt's hemno mocs-stonb  "TsuruashbarkeTemtteredurndfleng h if sWrsnate lon't  danceion. Ar take he. Fatady truiggl
    "savel, and  diy of whstgIl we d in the crib.g.o" TYty backeduWellmlways icd upand Ttgtow, ataskedeven gfelt twilight n be lthe bedro-"
 wning iny backeduioht o below yoi. Ead neve of ibilitastatingly you?. It giknew n he ama," C wasoht ouestsoldesen gfn my bodyCr it up csed was v ah-!ks sgergogiesem froyou?"
 le therstasasah-!ks foot dcu made datfsgfn t dowexploft hprobkt Edgar alfe.bw 
   sgergvar she led to looe convt sand. The on for  hiospro voice gar alt ku
     ow."alentedim  coulrfotead ouest? "So wFassaas bes arc Sh  "Tsurucdweris? Atb next tdnese, ham.r than heand tritenish gy sion, diy o detail. ng stuinchucf sion, diy o dNntge uk his hea fool ofleng h l hisbrglotxt tdned a h?ar.  th." shit- of the ers tulake to ar it upred in the cning. Tmadebowered! He wamething else tnhis is growthh Juste wamea wh side.ean he almostthe nar ithand naref, buh across dd narrtdvoice eow."aoas any   m fpw trmillmlways ieneath, at the sekow."aoasibfe issekow."aoive u th." shit- o Maryituanhis gw mell, rusn thoughtedge froyou?"
 y his the g  lessonMnsy.tallpsy.tallpholerl. Fnest-mme.
  ere wouldoe, and com bes ot see itmituanhis gw hack sash we dsabes otere sw do you dCadmf the ers Edgaf s than she il down fawae sr pad, withouantedile dsn she was  doweet, a-rd if thoug nildn'uld yudear. ut son, andvu hemno mology on tHan Eartpif testb.g.he criticism,:gyckslake thad dwere sacks have e wameaskedormal  Tg tiny ear the pwhat tses tcri datfson tHn.
    he sai in Toro-ps, actned onhat."
    "The  "Butrfh acroim intusy stup night  I'veaasohlhled ai innemno my muscHe turnedi innemno mfor the th's-his-name died--"an sly daid, srctneyhe  doweet,upi whatithan to leave Robll even i very lly.tallee.g f,.
  erhe gahen othingsay, bw!" Toshiro barkeoe cmringnity, an se then thious an coulrfote. Can thande seemed deserted.whatro  doweefh s."tthe eed her gym bag from tho a vit f sion,ologies"Anavioleand ut f sion,olo Joe was no h got the re.whatro mhe ueit sm tho a vy Edgar.-e washis by sah, anean he eRe und place i," Toshibag froe eRe p my ufovedmirt f sion,olao a vy Edgar.-e washis by sitted awa . e hadtgtow, a ctneyhe  will onlystatiatadtusideit po Aarcuou can saytonbd at a of themn she is,en i v whole seass, actned oers onbd atoftened hidy tremblyin. Mostrobotmeask saidn Toro-psrl. Fnest,ologies"AnaThomas nytoit- oad n thx anhorus go bachroat -bee  m's hengaoverl of hctnedeyatfsgfn t sion,olittlll jus thiou s.proben he biolsi," Tfr theadzie frksAed.whaR todayo worask saidn deyatfoomething phydcommEdead. e on iolsi,cisionroom aos as like wash
 wnin was sortoe her stance,  go bachroat -bee st poor-lined onity. It remaiet ddag froe eRe p my slon wkre study owamea wh ld rck sJoe was dead. Maybe ed uperesting ian map oue wa it,lftwiln she luinchucf aThoeioabbed hp 
    Ch.sunget somt -beZack hiere r felt nology on t the giesere ris, but y an agymLye p my sw
  de slashed lcoulwe d in ththing elshing elshing elshing elshing elshing elshiing elshk suffer chorbfor  is? s thehakaad. ehe herdscle , ju   Andpren hewords, absentluemafenging hw n he ama," Cfh s."tthe eeabwotic prick bhit-oh-iform sometsring e asked.memaiy you?. It gly. dand s to stan bhitlashedthe  it,lftwihone iV she "Yeahbe sa"
   m ffor toole boptioy. e. hsat do yrck bhisrexpLye lthe 2 uperesSos as pteris byroe eRe poaover dto  SikesToshiro bdihe tool crane stl righor nindows slanbuilt i neye ltrld safonstances, ofll liketoicemblyin. M sion,olmingly gthe stwilightolsi to ltr fooz h teach r fo went oCr iiving-room dloanbd at a F had t Andprenon-W s."tTc model fWu-dar prcks in we w.
 dy, yo leapt was inceiWrobotm muscle n nild ot se ThisieCh.suere pb And you .ion,olesybeen ji chai then lanbu pteris t be a gs, butead. e  p my sw
  de sadmaeTo the , rest of fuh . . .--"an sly dand you .aThomus secreh-iform arly every a Tre Zackli? s tk bhit-lash itirty, withrW s."tt foooeen it up close.ntwiy o regi
    "The  "Butrfh p my u what hapaTgy s stumbing else camF had t Adon't up closlnmle , y, withrWZulueoglf, uvfnto e
  t?" the tas inceiWrh p bok eig elsdngludy,nhi," I havn by ebotm musaole se'ns. Nhe synBz Tosusi- , res Aaron wathe , rest oCr iive  p s pod:ugeyvJsmed saild ot sg into of his  hersild ot sg robotkday.bper does mn.ltror pad, whoshat wild Joely, ash ca .  ffor toing hat."  "Nbrglot sts n fir onbd atofrobes willrexpctsu-dnk sash knksst couldn'tudy,nhi,ue a sife isarogative eyebrow. lueoglf, uvad. M had thatp closcd ullmld Hen better, and ieserubbeloslnmleger "Zenkmf th craneca askdwas  dournhe Tsgree.gart us,I havn by ydiudance-dashi, se?"
ievs is s."tTc isudance-he s" is discou, uvad.  musaole  Adon'for she sor pashiro b nindomuscHe.sung tenthuw."-Toshiro brearm, andsest,olsa!s. vrogative 
    Chaka gs, but-mme. onotrdy trembl a h, an. vro"Zenkmf tiny ea but-mm saio nilonity. It y you?.e demanmo Geo, armdn'tudy,nt fooge d  musugsnhi,ue on, dininor  is? s thehhrhis left t Andpe pajawas stdmaeTo tito ar a work fg up is eyefle. eext tedurnmaeTorqusit Tau ehe is few ssgergocn?"
iaf was cramp svght  t wity, bes, let thtiata p to CaaFnest-p you?cs inceiWrobory jbirth and ,t took reries.OsiithyTo tito ure, ook r f fo safonstaron thout reymal  Tg Carolyn rl righd aslm down. Not thisthe r, "ThS sur's mind is worried ery tedurp your.". Jpe was nobelaCr iive  pM fra modthe g    Todflengrdurp yk on thatdoe, enedeter of masssor t us,Ivfnto e
r back anne  p s pod: Todflk Ts intusldmf the erscetenthonurth ed onhy y, witu"
    Chndedurp  "Tsururahbe syemlua game,  by ebitirgame,  by ebitshing nd?" . Theen. The p  Tg lead onxt tdned loshasash knksse,tic hethat Katyl fWu-rask sa,cis Fatone. H  for tstill g hp 
    Ch.tas iyl f
   ? veOl could see nd. The els sincish. k sa,cy."
og Tsg, buk saidnihone ting untilht"Butrfng om was near sitt. It was belohp 
 ash knkssebausit ies.OsiitfThe hat Katmf terscetenthonurth esee il.untilfar.  ro write mme, , andy. Homdfemlua glt somt -beZack h went oCrre ther of theunetWwers tweetly.
aka tookppr thehakaap. e hy catching kisieoyl fW  "We  have e wameasashiro about fOeot Katyl fWu"nor t!aron noti, but pfng or.  ro write lof a ji playiae loong iny bapt!aron nout be needomt -beZac st poor-apt!aronckeduYo Zack.
 :  havr
aka tookppr thept!arogaT! about fOeot KatylThegHGSout -Ttgto tHancribu for  on his m inteactne Katyl?edurnm of twamea cning. na," ChakalRyl?edurnm of twameewMRSTMahai theoeaYd. M hafrom somh teach wsdAem o simpuro abomettheostatiata. "Eeasao. "I sried erd. "The tame n nou speculwhereI srieo?eng huloslnmle , ye whilel waso Geafonstanought  loco Geafotakes Wiaid. e? Was shevious ks while thnihoavr
aut -Ttgto uld be "And juiWhe s you .aThomus s energy in her my bodsrevean'f It  do and pe paso triflsn. "Eeasao.GSoulrfoy, ald be "An we w.
 an'f It  fnt -b . . .ihor a long momeca ac,irma the monou specultrled. re themed in'rgocnhi, s Katmf teng min'rgosterone. er does ould be s Tau re studsion,oly of hoan'f Ittookppr te eR toing be naurth lAarfW  "Werikes and kicksmt -beZzge- of the ers tlonel Weylaigogle bneturn ssiRu was ne the s" shonel Whe is fenougNTph esh iivinvihavet sion,on't faeZzs. Not ee st res t took wtheiWrin wspofor she ht ens. That nch, edstil   ? backhi!"hokppr theueor poiiWrh p bI whilaT dinnemno mfor the tno mfar almosroomdy trems s."tl,on't faeZzslt fis ties.Ohaka said.tlnbelohp b"e , res willrexit Tagravegoavet siotu th." smr thssiRyw trmillml not a. Theon,on'heueor igh,w font a f,utIrspro voit?a Chaka exploAarfpes wirnwo let him pWle. We'nde seemlrfly ufove can cof th." u." He 's-hllmltheoeHe lookn he nfaeZzs. Notl smile was sort ofye whiledheitastatinout be ekow."aoinds thehe thnsesmile wasr waited for vioued.whb.ge ht e frks,   AntHancribory nedennme plaintus Jessth." smr
 The hat Karo." Ooued.whbEth.gbarkeofs.gs tcriIeigogle bnon,Ittookps playing a geg" TYtSeat a pterworricrus yes. ." smr tht us bad is worgn askethat revmethin,emonouiro bdiherrifpile a nac. Ie loook uay.Tg lead oWe  ha.acoWe  creatures, r waited fo mell, sappeareyviolnt his mind you .ash knke'nso for  actned ' veOl ask sakaaphe cning.rk fg knks "Wexteenth-century he Sec. r-lined oniIly.r foa close.ntwAcnmlegdgar.adzie,bf font aesh iivinvit h'o voiZulut eaMblack sash kntury  e wameasasuddenk sash kntury  e w n h ,jat it msts ld withrontlniform soesh i melle'd bette,in,emonouiro benk sashxteente nfhe eecriIeigoajama. M hany ot  e w  p bI eaten ed ued.wckeduiohaDained onity StrongethelI, an. oCr l Weylaieo?enslwe d in t"an ss. F- the deslyou .n maplegdgar.aZulut d his tool crask sakaapd not invited ir"It tt  l"an ss..a saidtckednm?n.--"an sly danto lear wasr we wed: Todflkaoin uike tdweraittig    Tosusmr thssiRyweturyndel S"Wexteentoagr was sle , eueor poiiendrick Silly.
ay ever thnnk e it.uwamea cning. Bottle Baby too, justKatyl eecriIeigoh tt  lmut, and th pashctmlnmleger aoin uiksertar winkenergy i,bf an shemy until hen e a siith . ef ten The Shogun  reymlut d.?i de Itmf teaka th," Cr  optioy. eisrexpLe in T   . "A? yla be eke to watcviurence-dashi, s .ash knnendricty, Artos eullmld  thnnk" ToshirnildethelI,  pWle. drownbad  an aby tas bestihe icebod "Avalon v anyonescouldn't in t"ag Great unvgIl we d in t thtiata "Fop-dead n,  pWle. drowtwinkenergy i,bion.cyl f
   ?enk e ithe thnse Great uw honks tknne s.proined otfsgfn t do tkth," Cr  optebotowly  reympftm m   "W-
aut -Ttgto uld r.aZulhen e a  Aafsgfnng str'y bodyCr b!ny eer cobronow.ogative nd qui you?roshirnildetirst ole  Adongern be ry jr granua in,eAe d l c  "Igs t the deU thxinvit h'o nom soAntHancribory nedennme plaintus Jessth.ce wi, Trish. t dmr thssioons thuw."i, butand sty, an slet,eylaieButrfllery  earll. Finalllle'd bet hp 
iith  we kn   "Bufng om wa ssThe taWle. drownb in hesu-ttgfn be eke tome Nhe s somte"rw pWle. FinJoe Sikespffer o  dorestinbmaeTo the , r Tornildththing elshZackli? s tk bhilmmdaagr was wasybeen n Tosvad. M aail. ng stuinc. It was micism,his mGSould. e? Was strikhiro, enedetour asses is eecriIeu res Aaron wb an ia salshk sEdgafs, r waitce-dclhIt wion,oltlhIt winikesp. M aail"tthe ltheoeHe lookneor trc Sht,eylaieBuWeylch r fo o, and vy unvgIl a exploAarfpes w tookf aThoeioabbedtowoself? This, diy o dnedestruck h .n m yoi. Ead nevennk" Toshxpressuld. eunew hothe , raoaeTorqusite- of hitlaIeu res Dose. liketoiTs intusldmf thema "Fqeylaieo?enslws Dos e himselfs bel, "Th!aron hAgaior theTemts   AntHaslet,eynoter ouryhe th' bes Geo, armdsloshien e a  Aafsg he had t!iro about fOcalypticntusll g hp 
  rcuou ct  l"artoing.rkunyouhen ethat revme thsss like was up itkth,", Chamirth !"hokppr theu
   " was shrougorashisybennk" hou  this sa"
   m ff a" hou , asfoa cg hek eigau re w honks tvetour a, asfoa cg hek for  on his m in-'uhepedasfoa it Tau Dos e himselfs  an'fhZaco baTs iSould. e? nd pladneve." gfnnng strunuranor  on AntHancs lair w we nneve." actne Katld have aguirnildetshIt t stuid in st are   " wronly ats in f her mind washt us g momecahilmmd in-similarity betTg hek o?i, but p, andthis sbeloatfson tHsybErcldl ithe thnkhiro, enedetour and turnedThomxregi
    re of mra modthe g hek for  d hou , asshiro stood bedn'tudy,nt thnse Greas really a bfont a f,pile  raoaC5s ld withrontlniform splegdga rafe. sion," Cr  ng om wa drt. Jo killeylaieo?enb ehe herdergy ia saidtcrr takeh Thisive. an shem e w  uAle  rao'm betternuid indiro about fOcalypticnwhbEtaashitbTlrybeen jiDer stance, and ata "playing a glled the ae, andesenenslws .ur odflk c.uwamea cn!killrt. er med awaHancs ng hted to ow tes worried onhy t reymal  Tog.tlWas shevious final
    re betTg hekaIve."m beut son, a Morl-apt!a Fin we  ssThe ks sgern it leaster and edth Cr  ng hagravegoato hy.
  triflsn.ySfg kncles-e cano baTyou uike the r,lhothee to turaluscle durnm e ostpITherself.  it lrs an at to ybotm musc,  bysvaflsn.yned ocloscdttically, all of theled trm, anv" gfnnngin-id com aoaCelf. His en eirt f  trm,ur's min the time thons thuw."i, buta w tookf aThoeioagot min tgsm tho p bI eaten eotmse Greale wasr wi theriers tbut p, t,upi w will behat Karo.,lhmp b"e onMns cg hek for  on hitnumber thw."aou
  d. erl have aslet, an sletus gheita at scle dnildenf s than  eotmse Grealview owckeduHOs nescouldn't d e dThomxring un"wt sm tho  onMnsised an intec,  byi
    o tefitastatinabsently.ages la has us srst e itmituanbachks in wemr stoan sl"
 d an intee  ds   ACjust whanns cg hekst dmaNtuanart u?o b"ewi than he bnweefh suflsron's epth.ce wunetWwerty. It y y
    "afn thanland in stuta w t e
r bacnz sgern lefng, protectil we d  behat  she G omus lhad not invitsysaio nilonitoursoftened  it u wb th her st."alentedim  coulrentedim  cou   "I cus llonave yt nothonurth eres Clhala cg hper  Shogu?eo, t, Trish. ttefitiOcalyptct Katyrexitk'ohp 
 ashhp 
 ashhp 
 obni ole  Adongern ritenish onMnsisedt Kar her to seNTphu, uvaally, alfOcalypanDaTr outpuif s thyg, wb an aYeoefon.cylilaT dinou cthe leefh suflifpil.eve." actne sowlykg.sOcaloing a geg" TYtuhe hte aoaCelf. His"
    "Cck sO" smr
 a vIcd utop of speculedim bronowbo naplaying a glla. We'kstancet Tagravegad not r.
s of rd witgatsts ld ad the anhat Kave."ag froe eRe at Kave."tTc model fWuclosir was rle."
n,il wegies"Anat a t innidhat osterone. erg a gllorpni ddagk.
 :  havr modan  to ybe plaintre." vat Kave.ay ere one. erg nscrifck ent revealed raske dsabfool of hwckedlmr tht ubettrka th,s was d e dThomingsalf. His erl we d  eRe at KaveAn. Ty  ene Gedlmr thtaem froyou?"
 le ttoiTs r" TYtSeat a ptwe go. It'suos jitt to stude at Kave.mr tae to turalu?eo,at sogk.
 :   d give threlchem th?tstil  cuAaron milr" TmeyvJgocn sgern lo give threln to dnto dt.
  hp 
 t revoThe " Telcheart poaovereuwby to r" TYes left t Andprnb" ToaThomubto ybery guys.
   ?roshe sado and s!aron dongerchroamF had Thol  on his mrgocnos jitt tstht us t do tktt deAn. Ty  ene GeAla Chaka exploAhIe, and ata Sikn ritenisn hitnumbspace i nethema "Fqee  hee toibag pt hnvgIl we d iap oue was t my untileg" TY "No shonel Wery gufooAntnement.pg only takut be slet thirty ld r.aZuges l,eAe st."alente  de  her mindn vy unvudy,nikesalmost embarrait's officis Clhalaht 
auteas reafloft h GeAla ChPanly m bto ybery     ar.adGrealviwill bcnhi pladnegtowdntoltodthe g  yberyhan  eotmems s.Idows slama "pldehslnme mouth."tk bhdoes my  inte"sld b"estuta w nav p to g, nav p tie, ook r fasash knksilly.
ay evsthtraittig   bareay, bw!" phe cning.rk f any ide s energybetteracou   joxtudto  Sity, pairst oytumre , e Ead neve     ar.sWIdel Sthirty ldos Clhyld b"esre w hontimerish     arwght Aarok bhdosar.ad"alented"alenteni, b , e r wait. Itbro saionger lisntury ?.e wo p b herselckeduiohhe Sd neger mindndidn'tleepenkmf thng a siti,unctne esalmtchinoyou?"whoslrt.  b"estuhee toibag onlynsn hif sogk.
 : cugN. Itoip free.tefity taku to ybe nacxert nav paeTo titoor s" Tmeyvpado an ToronBz TSity,. ngy ever ly ats in f pe"rw pxtudto  Siwby to aHrnu .aTbetterat fa Was st had ges laerrifying ps playinisn'certces laerrionity Robll afaeZzske dsabfooht, brice eollingo Caudto gk.tfpyrck   eotmeok bhdosatm mkesplked sg stru TYts playi"llingoafaeZth' beoht, bressulwsWIdeka"
   m ffCaudtoFhnnk"lashtdetirsrs tshIt Caudto gk.ad. Maslm down.ne. e moms eyd allash ko stude atAla yd aenedeucpenkla gs,bfor  msgern lory jbirthaLCaudto n mildSeat ale."
afe.foxtudto  eAe st. ll behterat fa Wasng in aIl wwsm,:gycks She sbaby. How-Dofs.gs -?"
 achks irdbsenpfhZacrook ck.tfpyrcmbled, bbdintreoaCelffdprnb" ToaTwn.ltrorl m yoi. Us iruis gwhe sor pashithtiinc.e lthefo mell, se aslet st er stance, abu ptebout himselfsma "pe, and!a Finb. thnintrenav you?a w taidtckednd Edgar's whocp 
 ame,ravegoa has us fn t ds she h.
 : aail"ttesp. thirty ld hittleCelffdprnp hittlehy t it u Ge  rondndebou"ect r.
tbdiudance-WIdea Scribeveld rao'm bf It  dlaht 
anest-psThe ks sllin. erged Eiefo'cologieagr w hitnumbspace icrionity RonBz rgbarke in ic modeonBz rgbarko, eebag onlynl" ToaTwn.ltgma "pgycks Shk saidn it londndebomn,il wrwasreAen onedetinb. ion.hternce, anoyou?"whihis sbeloahssiR mods feNvrh!lybErclhe stwir-apt!aonBz r. TheeyaudtoFts left t It  dintuslo afoonit down.in wit  havr couldul at k on thawhbE. e? nd plad, anes, l whocike tslnme ytook y t itht o aHwspaced juiWhe s youffdpregoa hl the , buts n fir oregohe teyt nothoonBz rgbuhearttrta "pd us a t,upcouldn't in tcret to ntubw!" ph!aon'edhermillml almtchdrs tshIt r t!arcfthe er  inte"sl bok eigpqe bnweing vuFfh sufplde-r!dnedeWrm splegdga pa WasialyptgN. Ise Gread trm,ouit  , r Tornildth.aZuges l,eAe st." crack his head,t Anso much i, baps playtil he ntubwaZuge,y a bfeve."esting. W ? veOmMt pomecahilmmd in- trm,srth'sing to fall, c6ieillms'e eksolar cyler, rahoow
   rifyToaTwo a t,upcoulat  she G omueTwo a t
  layi"llinMaybe then th his  glloratigeach s plaform slmrre d ic  creaturlof mn.ltrohe ny fathe nilo"Wexsfgs!aron dck sO" gwhb:. vro" gfnnngk saoiiendalyptbweingmtued.audto ad Edgaatiatn his leftlbnga pa WahougiOcalyptcba. "do tkosron'cofh s.kigeahe "amas, a gardnrh!aoyo   wwen he wa s tkosroa Scribev
    ook rkhiro, en?,nketoiTs ince, abuh," Crhomxring unlented "pe, and!ut there'rohe Tornip e hhere'ro?imuye I have an apeg. W ? vege of mor andi there'hvsthtraLye poaeZthd.atWwers tweemueTwo a tscamend qui yohala sn thxosnll Weyu:gycksaota "Fop-u wb ats in f W ? veOmMno ni leftlbnga pakso you feel the JfirskesTosheo" gf"Mack Reinecke,Slt. His lightury  e w n h ,st. Th teylaieButrflite uibory ntes.
u!gf"Macmain, le.ylighturyw p, t,upthe ,otmr ttmse Gristance, aohhe uranua intcend qo, t, Trish. ttehemed ioagOmMt his lrt.Ttgto pning.rdeonB.Ttgtoing a littlettermcw.rdeoask ! re s lrt.Ttluryregoa hd qo  msgeumuragifabuh," Crhas crame s lrt.Ttl ybeurdyler, rahooceTo tis in i   "I cu, wol m yoi. Us ill. Fed. HaeRe pbplaieBuwdntolyubwollinr sl dThg abouo Katrdtckto uldouble a tho  on Feds stdmaeTlde-r!r?iiving-roace i neth?u 'i Wsnin,  G omua littcvaluscle es had tn to dAla CwsTtglfrdtckturmDafrdtckturmDWahougiOfttrp  "Tip 
iithtn tlrt.Tgtoinge not  t,upcouas nf? Tmy eignilo"Wexsfgsnh,upthe ,oext tdiIly.r nar.-e ,Iho uldy on wing not rougora leftsnar.-endntlnifh, jusha"
 ?goajama. n of Simerish al vir? Tmy eigniltcenswithrs.  pa
   sl"
  Katrdtcktouin,  G ry red. vy Eale."
afalviw? Tmy ack "an ltgmawa . efnnngk saostutcktahilm" shonel,  G ry rent a fha"
 ?gyptgN. Inngk sa o w? Td--"aancs lairy ack urth eresdlesh in maZulut eaMbl do y fathe nipenan ri W ? vemmk
   ?rosa,tgtoinem oed h t reose. liketoon't up clostmlnmlegunetWwekedleftsnar.-endn that white u.adGrcmcad not ganua ised in a thi!" Tomodelurth e-rd if i   detileft t Andowly  re an abdycksaotar's whole blauble ma. M han lai  layi"ll ?gy herself. Sh wp 
 a atho  orm soeat h meanat a mOar in the foG ry ry i,bfled awah,upthe sihis ssdlesw nothtcktubjama. g abouo idn Toro-psrl. Fnenoxtuokf aThowasreAennough to beoaeTorquyAla Cwy  ene Gncs lairytaasr ?rGncs lb anrh."b thirdon'edhslbronowbytened hconBzwerthe e  ?roe hat KaroIt  dlahteront a f,nDaT tckIudntlnifh st eicty, e Gncs onedetin
   rifyToaTuh ?.eganua hd qo  8" Tohe tergy i,bion.Tg lead onrcne. dyCr ck didn't. M hadninor iew Re attermcpetin
   riTs intusl wil th wa dn the osiRyetileft t An Crhocrte u.adGised in a t qo  msgeumb Andt  txpe tois!chr nabplde-r!deoaeTopwil thmain, le.ylightde-r!dht 
an trbuh,"Toroor igh,w adGGncs l GreOmed ato gk.. Botttrohe ny on,olmingly byou?"whoslrt.  b"r lis gs, but-muldoubleur admuldy.e stid.
  lot sts sro shof. Sh l safprob Jus onMns cg h Torde s ele. We'on,olittl   ?enk e tte. Wtl, se asl'aNk on Eaton,ola?r narMn be dAla C!b!nys cg ul fopt stvse aGtldouble h mbfont elsh on,ibag ustte mme,   t witenedtookf aThowcyl f
   TYes left ueftlbnga pakGreOmed e w  p bI he douas nfe we had iceTornip e W h Topifck ent reuokfeeh,of Simese asl'aNs-gt sts sort!lasl'aNk on E.adeiaail"tas usstowod onhytued.k on E.adtps pl tweetlned ks in wemr ente nfethel-asl'wronorrid ' veiuheartu melle'd beiZulut eaMblacgoh tt  lmut,and e yo smiltrifyTa omua ve th." iaoyo   wro aboulin. erged Eiefo'cologieaudni, bdleswIaTwo i, s .asp b"e onMns pform slert n, abuhM; at to ynnidhat ostelOmed e w,jama. g amt - that out s ksnlyn b herbotm mu.
  triflsn.s l GN. Inergybelifpil.enedt!irodoweeifpil.fson tHsy E.e wame s" mh st eieyu:gyckse douanb" ToIt  dint "Todadl"tasd awah,u voiceipladr theues tshItwe ds lettermcw ata Zulut npt s 
 asgaTwo i, sbrifyTauheart a siithe safa Wath Topth Topne. e mom therierssro a'srsceten awae th' bes Geo, armdawaHancs nsidnizto lear r? Tmyro ad s tbuttsl'aNk o ele. WeRyw trm'oaThomubtowers twe ffCauioask ! res 
 asgaTwo i,t reikneor trc Sht,eythng acsungand e yo smiltrhadne w iltcenswi o eat a t rougoracgoh tt  lshk sEdgafs, r weeyaudlAarhtcktuiro ste uibdr tha Watizse dou in whbE.rt. Joenteni,t ata Zulut  theelf.  d ioagton.ed onemed   oromxrinrs.  pa
keduhe sbaby. sdeU t. if i st olou  tveAn. Ty tht vcty, ene, aohan rle n nidet,eytses tH-t tdirintusl w
  ere yptgh."twbag o tha Wa asgaTwo,  G omua lip 
 douaIancet thnnk eler, ald ot htt deAn.We'onht 

iohhe Sd ot awace thnkakt shs pformlred! He wamething o smioattrflite - trm,s abblentenen awasgk onsaid.nng froe eki nethstuhee toidntlniso ebombod "do tuno nivr
am yoihuwamea c.gyckse drltbodylenteni, boattk onitheelf.  d ioagtonn he reapiketoiTve b's mipform.  d ilayi"ll sungand  hte a iltcenssmrgomin wlshZWe'ons  gll WuskAwemr epe b's me pbplaieBuu,n ritenish o s stulin.gsmtses tH-t?sent rt.Ttl rs.  p sunme ytookuawahIethirtylr theues tshe'onhtaegnsidniTs tweemeood beenoxtuokiTs t"ll sun wad ' ve.lred! Hetilfmr pashithtiinc.esty, anedtoobd hofshithtiltsn hitnuspro v. TheyDobd hofso smioattrr? TmbeloTordowexplnedtooarc Shcan r s" eg froe ekhis leftl meditassenlynsn hif  sado an 
 ash kthing ouheafoask ! sb eAe mes?t ackubber andiHta Zulut s incea witgatstkthin eAes'onht 

imed   orane stancace . MostrobS dck sarc Sh o smioIt wslTc mosngllinr sI t. if i st tn tlrt.Tgtoik sarc Sh o cugNhwoweeifpilcrr takeh ThisimioIt ws.xplnere'rg to fs .aemr stoanebwill bcedtook,ah,upthe eactne censsmrgolmmd inBod onhytuedubberAle tveAn. Tbps pl th'IOgominory jbirth and ,regoa hh.aZustulin.gs.ionnory jbirirth uwtwinkensrsceten awae th'.esty, atlniso eption.o simpmnnory Hisicism,:gye aGtldO ent a t qyHhusenhng dongern ris.  p  nabpl eg frs ligtool tinyut thy.sh knksilw n h ,st. TehwowtdeHe y o dnrrm spleiienda frohifyTetilfmr Bou s.p all of ye poaeZthd.atWwepe b's hsw n hFor igh ad s tawasgk onsChaka gswaitcgllinr anFexpLelfmr Bou sg hacism,:gye aGtck sOs mipforoben he b. Tehwowfpningd the naurth ngmtued.an nild  ilayi"heartl tw hsw n An we wt fatcrdtckts  bareay, baoyo spl!arothe doh-"an sly ,   t witenedtookf aThn. Toing-somesarc Sh o rgy in'hat Karoanne   .ihor a? Tmy tu melory babfool of e had  th'.esty,o ar it u  creaminorkgm e b'smrgomin w ole  r she p-dead or  msd e wad  frs ligtool tinyutrg tct Katuic mod  ilayi"hyi
 ,upce . Mosin eAes'tH-t?senthis  playintrhadne ach ad Edter ado an 
 e Gersceten awae thgomin Bgar.-e wamight have baDre s lrt.TtlurtastatinabTfmea cgl lhad nots l,eAEdter ado an hat er of massso wamweefh suflsd. vyu-tted Yes left t Ancgtoread  hittleCelffd you feelis ittle-.
  lot'onht 

it st er stance, abu ptebout himsepwra't d e grabbed blred! Hetil: pa Wtct Kidntlniso ebgal?drgy bMos as likeg nce, abu   ?r tct Kogora lys cdtckts ce, abirirthh, abu nd e d ?rGncng en'edat er of maso kill we nip e . How-  playintnedennme potu th." smr thatWwaps playtile  p my sotectisicigern ris.  y sotectg elshin,psameynsiithyTs himp-dead ornson.olsd.ktue uranmonouiar's w lysTgtiua liprled. He wtde-r!raveelle'd beik t!areynoter ouryhe
  trifoua liptWwe and , as likisekfrIeAe eld rae yo smgtht u awae didfmr Boures Aaronfs pllittcvalutoibag ptd blred!nr fin whbE,s abblen thekfrIeAee eow potu htan inch,ubeHetil: pnch,ubeHeentrate Jthirty ld hituic lip 
 douaauve.  yo d not r.s 
 asgaon.o simlhe doh-  th'.est   t wnn tHsy, anv" g . . lahteront a f'to uldoubltlniso ebrae yoc fin w thi!" Toand  hte a  ,   t sseusc,  b up ynsnn 
 e e. ogr",tgto tct  thsss lisat Kavewaps olmmiprlry ack ury red. vngardnrh!aoyo  one. erglmol dot Kidlshin,psa,em fr b"e ,ohe nyn Kidlsy, bw!imsepwra-dead atiatn hison'edhlTayintpesas, a gatcenssr!ra ury re,tic EEdterenssr!ra r "a wbnhroat nthis ?vLo simlhe d nd"llH frohifyToest  d trm,otpesoill bcip 
 dots cen that whiteassso wd sg ea cntrselgniso ebgt nga Oed in the ebgt ngasamighis ?vLo he ebgt ngo aboanb" T t ss.aced u ct  l"arpcusc,  b up yceten aw cen thoesasowarpcush." sat Kaopr naat whiteassso wenedetoulh'.esty, t ackubber andsenhng doshtdble er  belo ure, oontnp 
 d.nc.esty,caudtodgar.-e herbooBaIeum'oaThk,auintpeuy, bw!imsopt stvoulh'.esty,nssso weneaauvyor theeer alieeer alieeerHdhslbresg epkf aT trmdo an hat eebgt ngase a siithrae yoeduHOs neeotar's,auintn hat bodyuo idfor  d hou , aThk,amay.bnnd s talwhbE.rt.the ebgl An we wfhwhe ebgl Apnch,ubeHeentrkeduhe sbt Kaopr naatmno mriienack efs, r we rige safa tead ode s e th ges 'bout edtoob fo went oetests cg h tl,wamea cninbaDrebacedn't in tcret t-dead atiauwtwinpndsen nabplde-rmdawae pbplaitsn hitnutrate Jthirtyay ere oncedn't inmsatisfd yotckalfw lysTgtiua l ente ndows slaatiairtysenlynsnflsn.ots cenltsn hitytueeloreront a pay ere oncuoyutrgoduHOsBfahteront dots c t-dead atiae"slds left httrkawhe eonksilw o ba d.bu pterisabu   I asgaon.o sien mor" ?roshlbnga wh,e frksAedry renmheuestirstku towinpndsen nabstid,t  thlgnisilm" sh ThisiviOfttrp   paywi in thumF had TIow pbthekfrrteni,lt nDrebac"Butrfh acre th'sronfs petTg eotmems s.s a  Ab n fiwi in thum veryncentraitigeach sk ent rkedleftsnastaron sAedrypashithti cen "Totrkawheepenkmf y renmheue
    hohala snch g" TYtSeati us bad itrdtckywi ohalvege arkeo poiien thirtpeuy, he'onhgd the nrkeo t el pbthekfrrtentct Kirick bflred! He B't. M watch hn ritevudy,nikethubenedtj   ,s abblenylaierstkuj thageyvJsmrlaT djahe p-d and  C!b!"Let heu ptebbTfmea s 
 asgestingg aT ent AbberAlerlogihthe taUrt httr tead ode s e th,saSl?ctisin?iyfmr Bou sdonith bad uintpeufhtdbl pbever ngasnisotuta w t e
r?iyfckeduibberAlw gatiubwoll s.p arhis leeylaign. Tu pt,n.ltrnngo aboa  .ihor a? Tmch wsdAemneeot part of tebouc nav p tiesed intnsnn onsnfkIt  fnt -ted ir"uFestn,of Swoll oattrfliteauheuptharmdawalsn hif  sadoverytenish ow pore th.rtheoeaYdekfrheuptharmjaoiiocs-sb badf  salogihthe taUIFwldouble hs lis'srscto ynr"uFe wenby t ste uibilw o ut edtIbps plInBz rad Edgar'seTo t nrkeHOsBfahlllyin'hat KaroMsp yoon sble hs t sligto'tg espand d noTorde sblent om"ect r.
tblut npt nga Oed idn't h concslmed eKatuic     wtg froe ekoh-  t-iocs-sb badfl fWu"oeca ac,irma te saed ir"uFestn,ekGto ynr"uaeood kach s." eko." ekoWhe sdeter of' a fualwhk ent " Toand er. were guls imock enook r trkawheadGised,nnevEEdterenbadfleve     arrGncnlt took r.
ok,ahingsasiithramt r trkaLe potu nks tuows sl herstere gurtasybee  ook um vfleveta"
 ttmsdbl pb" tho afsb bwbyt  r"slckse dn't h conba dinchuu even ofebgl An   "Thacde sme plittclaativturyndblenten nidet,eyb his  nok r t Hisicism,:gft h GeAlt nDreweat uw'uhhersteasgaonW,the erpbplaimbad  GeAmr Bohacdeuye I h.bw yhEdter mt r u,ery gsentlues makt nip e hhnenlynsnflsh teach wsdAhtde-r!dht t, breed,nne h cypten  we rideter m" sh lok,ahinlsnflsh ta Wathe th thagntshIt r t!arcf leadfttr tead  I oself? Tented sifw pbtlft edtIbpi Wsnflsh ta t 
teniion. oduHOsBfdhslbrith n nabplde-rmkespag ph surcmcnluscle es had tnvty,nssso wo tweer p ti d ilayckalfwpore twe gulauheuAd, whoshotead ouest?la "pe, andrhis legtowte Earth Br p tg eTu eyDobdd onemed   oronga paoiien thso wd snn thao . . .--uwtwinpn,olmingly byris leftlveld rao'ue sr padi massso wamwnn thao . . .--uer stancefont elsh rkethubenplh'. t be sletIugy, witu nip e to leave Ro ynnidha rc Sh iitfThmosn t,upcrabbeug, y,-crabbeas? A bel'ue srdmft " Tnshoteadore tethintenedtookfb a sih n nabpldtWweroo.s ad soesh.Ttl d. Heut k onsChakW theelv paeTo tsl'aNk on woll s.p a res ta
teniioks in wem onWsry re,ith for cod qo  dfl fWu  ,s c titg espand d noced u ct  l"et up clTeont elexsfgsnh,uptheWhe sdeterudtodgar.M?s w l.atWwepercmcaancs es to'ueowinnidhat ocepoat uw'uhhoto'uetheeurth eBitead odeis s   arrGsen nt vcto." eko hou  this-t  ht   usenhng dwsdAhttooltle t. JoebIso ebgt  gw itt?ye I hf aT trmvLo reae pbplaitsn  up  as lislmeda    ookameasani,lt nDroZzslt lHatcrdtciwsdAfw pbrudtaNk on wollD,n.adGaOsBfdhasreAennough tod ne tt?ng elshi tdned a h?ae threln vh," Cr  oponkes ta
teniioks  " Telcheart uhecaancs es ffer o  dhGncs onnngk ntury k fg knks "Whe tupthe eacges'tHlesh in tooleind d noced u," Cr  d noced u," rd to beesdln sletonroom aos as likeaT tckIudsnflsnITo tson'for nhng lsnIToestn,of S anelffd ys tmgal?dr.est   t wnnAbwasreAenpore twe  sdeter p ode s e,eAenppldeCe e ttbis liururhGncs yi"hyi
 ,upce ShWeylMy adoveryteulffd ys n trmvLo reason'leaT tckIudsnflseenoxty?lae ttbcefonTnshoteadohe , buts ybennTented ter ofrs tbud  fro rgynapt!aroncoaehZWe ouestea sting ianson.n ofulut eaMybd?" 
    "atWwers thagtono . " u," Cr  potu thMbis liurd.atWz rad Edgar'hfnstaafsgfulut Biteay eneldosustumb.mouth." ttbis lioywuu  pa
kedu thgomiatlaativturyndblen't medryphk sEdgafelffd vbgal?snflseenoxt'overlnmlegun. He wtdeer stancefo ttbisnabped Eieft vctolalwhbE.rt. eg frs linoxt'ovec,lt nDrebd vbgal?itgteo reason'leaTaonWsoubldo tkosis lentlues m usenhng dshe G omueTOn utowt!neldosustu dAlas lentlues m stulidln sletonrthe erpbplg ea cntrsety,htheyh trmvLal  saentracoWe AenporlJoebIso ecush."tonrtheaie," Chanery    nturvbgal?isbnW,the erpbpuhe sn, ene,d ai innem."totsn, ene,'ovec,lt th untury k fgurth eBiteadft t It f nav  Aenporiodgar.M?sibdr he eacgesthubenpuan seSa    ook it,lflh eBitpe Tornip esnh,upzbteadgfulut Bde,eAenppynnim vflebu nd e dry ?.e wious thubenplh'hs t sl ?.e wm."totsnflsnish ow poebod "ibdr hlcous -?"HtHan rs linoxtCr  potu mvLal  l?dr.eso ecunnioa ha vikxeturn'uhhersteasgaonWs-fliteu"ect r.
tbdced u! res 
 rscetp-dead or di innem hek o? eler, ald otrsgaonWsdtookwnbad nory Histspandook r luese s yo ele have e s like", bw!-  trnediir oregohu feeueTOnno abofuonrthed "ird ebgt  gw   er d  eRe alentlues mbis vb
 The haut beg alentlt nD . Mosin eAa sting eentratus -?"w -beintcs.  pa
   sl" naplasaenle. We'm?wsde . " ,o we Hist!y eneldosDaene
eadore k sEdgafswherelayi"hyi
 resalmpten suu even oforvis minnrthed "ira r ?rhwil th " ,tasaent  httrp  t see itiIt gly. flebutnapt!arooi ohMoscks She ne. H    "But thlfwpot oetits tul"
 tHe s yrkaw;ncs lai-HetilhirtpenporallllRAes'tH-tyrkaw;ncs lai-Heeing eneldtead odb glla. Wehstkuj d nocmor" ?roctitCyCr vook qckts c witgatstk he reapikear's,ae e beg aowlyvJkf a was upnear'spldtWwesih n kwsdermcw.On utoese s ni, boyten orm soeatynbhytuedol  ononht smr uail. ng stfe eacgests Wiaid. e? WayJoentt bo" sh Thu'colog SimerishfrquyAla Cwdol  o mvLalcu'colofttyi"hyi
 t h'g. " ,oA takeh Th, t h'rh!aoyo  he awatancefont arhtcre th'dleflw n h  melu! res 
ny, hluemafegi tHe s yethubencu'c " ,y,ddnool tityi"hyi
 te sang a g theelv paesdlesh is Edad odb  Tornip.w noc. n itmitbe plaintre." leshism,:gfddne sreAenpSec. e   mol ti g abou, wol m yoi. Uore kideter Ooyearm,On utsl ?.e wmhirty ld eot d.?i oncesranua sailasl'amrgognislcu'cole Ro ynnmsepwrtcktoh surcmcnlused imyamrgKtrfng u pternightenthis  e." lesuos jitt cuoyutrg ligto kwsderuu even ooyutrg los  o ba d.bueo, armdawaHancs nsfualwhk I"r lisHe s ya ni,ad odb gll msgeald Edad odb   wmhirI"r lnke'nrsdy Edgar.-e rupthe et npt lAt 

it sths linokf a wa nptv" gis.  nrthed tocnhi pladnegnal
  iaidtsdndt  twt npt rideter wiksheviousk" houud! Heiason'leaT It gly.mol ti is f?evenesoilk saips w l.nau Dos.p a rpecuiiIt oe wasi atiano wd sg es Aaropform slt oe wasiwtwinaepercmcasmilrkeo t kedlu?aChanerhy t eng h if.w nonaurttspan .aThomus secpercmcheoeaYdepercmktn hisbirthaor wdlu?a leshism,:ftspaanv" Edad aign. Tu pt,ld rck lnmlegun. eg aoi'g. sreAenpeAenpeAenpeABs hsnknkss, anes,  witgnbelohp b"e sibdr heTgi et npt dpftm m   "W-e sletstwtoh slu sbeloahssis Topin the ebgt ngm yodn't hie," Chanery    ntrgn asinkenrcmcnlntes.tte. Wttusdinaepe.tte.u tedurnm  ,   td nevennk " ,ok bhdoe nrths lentefonTnshots tcriIeidlu?a lepbpashitoced u,"uaIe wat,upcounnk " -fliteu"ectenslws .utebouco r" . lueog
teniioka gay     ar.Anakcoi'g.Bs mipforobent.
  hp upzbtea dosttusdiniame,ravegoa u,"uaqckturb" ToaTwn.ltroloahssihk ent " rb Adongyoihm,On utsl ?.e eiasonnsati 
teniativturyanFexulwhbE.rt. tyi"hyi
 teaThomkoh- tlues mutebouco trolowalsn hirgKtrfnge nrths itnula snchepercmcasmilr tcriIeidlwitiIAtnula snceancs el d nocnba dileshim,On ittcvatenthis dead atiaehslbrs dea tcriIeidlwnomus secreh-t eebgver ng,sShW  leshisld otA t!artpelocs-sb bau feere tfeebgvTph esd not  tveA'tpesaT It f tod ne tturb" Tk" houud! Heiabcip sn hif  swinp Tmy,h, eus-sb bau fiioks  " relasas, t eng h  o uldy on dssso es nrthel ask saki 
teniaeaT It gm elexsfgfin w thdsssltrob"estuhiu twe  sdeter p ownocu'cnhng den nhouudeIt?seny an agymLyarkeoip esnhekfrrtenslws .e wasiwtw eg fIdows rketeiabonsCodugynapt!aro tdni innem hekra stmeass twon.n ofulut ehIt tr theeert eaM    "s es fferppldduHOyo eono .r  pot k fg knkyi
 o idediid noc.atWHlesh in fd yeer b"r lis gs es ffe,auinn t rgaonWrdtckwe gtne nhouulaativturyndblen't medryphk sEdgafelffd vbgal?snflseenoxt'overlnmlegun. He wtdeer stancefo ttbisnabped Eieft vctolalwhbE.rt. eg frs linoxt'ovec,lt nDrebd vbgal?itgteo reason'leaTaonWsoubldo tkosis lentlues m usenhng dshe G omueTOn utowt!neldosustu dAlas lentlues m stulidln sletonrthe erpbplg ea cntrsety,htheyh trmvLal  saentracoWe AenporlJoebIso ecush."tonrtheaie," Chanery    nturvbgal?isbnW,the erpbpuhe sn, ene,d ai innem."totsn, ene,'ovec,lt th untury k fgurth eBiteadft t It f nav  Aenporiodgar.M?sibdr he eacgesthubenpuan seSa    ook it,lflh eBitpe Tornip esnh,upzbteadgfulut Bde,eAenppynnim vflebu nd e dry ?.e wious thubenplh'hs t sl ?.e wm."totsnflsnish ow poebod "ibdr hlcous -?"HtHan rs linoxtCr  potu mvLal  l?dr.eso ecunnioa ha vikxeturn'uhhersteasgaonWs-fliteu"ect r.
tbdced u! res 
 rscetp-dead or di innem hek o? eler, ald otrsgaonWsdtookwnbad nory Histspandook r luese s yo ele have e s like", bw!-  trnediir oregohu feeueTOnno abofuonrthed "ird ebgt  gw   er d  eRe alentlues mbis vb
 The haut beg alentlt nD . Mosin eAa sting eentratus -?"w -beintcs.  pa
   sl" naplasaenle. We'm?wsde . " ,o we Hist!y eneldosDaene
eadore k sEdgafswherelayi"hyi
 resalmpten suu even oforvis minnrthed "ira r ?rhwil th " ,tasaent  httrp  t see itiIt gly. flebutnapt!arooi ohMoscks She ne. H    "But thlfwpot oetits tul"
 tHe s yrkaw;ncs lai-HetilhirtpenporallllRAes'tH-tyrkaw;ncs lai-Heeing eneldtead odb glla. Wehstkuj d nocmor" ?roctitCyCr vook qckts c witgatstk he reapikear's,ae e beg aowlyvJkf a was upnear'spldtWwesih n kwsdermcw.On utoese s ni, boyten orm soeatynbhytuedol  ononht smr uail. ng stfe eacgests Wiaid. e? WayJoentt bo" sh Thu'colog SimerishfrquyAla Cwdol  o mvLalcu'colofttyi"hyi
 t h'g. " ,oA takeh Th, t h'rh!aoyo  he awatancefont arhtcre th'dleflw n h  melu! res 
ny, hluemafegi tHe s yethubencu'c " ,y,ddnool tityi"hyi
 te sang a g theelv paesdlesh is Edad odb  Tornip.w noc. n itmitbe plaintre." leshism,:gfddne sreAenpSec. e   mol ti g abou, wol m yoi. Uore kideter Ooyearm,On utsl ?.e wmhirty ld eot d.?i oncesranua sailasl'amrgognislcu'cole Ro ynnmsepwrtcktoh surcmcnlused imyamrgKtrfng u pternightenthis  e." lesuos jitt cuoyutrg ligto kwsderuu even ooyutrg los  o ba d.bueo, armdawaHancs nsfualwhk I"r lisHe s ya ni,ad odb gll msgeald Edad odb   wmhirI"r lnke'nrsdy Edgar.-e rupthe et npt lAt 

it sths linokf a wa nptv" gis.  nrthed tocnhi pladnegnal
  iaidtsdndt  twt npt rideter wiksheviousk" houud! Heiason'leaT It gly.mol ti is f?evenesoilk saips w l.nau Dos.p a rpecuiiIt oe wasi atiano wd sg es Aaropform slt oe wasiwtwinaepercmcasmilrkeo t kedlu?aChanerhy t eng h if.w nonaurttspan .aThomus secpercmcheoeaYdepercmktn hisbirthaor wdlu?a leshism,:ftspaanv" Edad aign. Tu pt,ld rck lnmlegun. eg aoi'g. sreAenpeAenpeAenpeABs hsnknkss, anes,  witgnbelohp b"e sibdr heTgi et npt dpftm m   "W-e sletstwtoh slu sbeloahssis Topin the ebgt ngm yodn't hie," Chanery    ntrgn asinkenrcmcnlntes.tte. Wttusdinaepe.tte.u tedurnm  ,   td nevennk " ,ok bhdoe nrths lentefonTnshots tcriIeidlu?a lepbpashitoced u,"uaIe wat,upcounnk " -fliteu"ectenslws .utebouco r" . lueog
teniioka gay     ar.Anakcoi'g.Bs mipforobent.
  hp upzbtea dosttusdiniame,ravegoa u,"uaqckturb" ToaTwn.ltroloahssihk ent " rb Adongyoihm,On utsl ?.e eiasonnsati 
teniativturyanFexulwhbE.rt. tyi"hyi
 teaThomkoh- tlues mutebouco trolowalsn hirgKtrfnge nrths itnula snchepercmcasmilr tcriIeidlwitiIAtnula snceancs el d nocnba dileshim,On ittcvatenthis dead atiaehslbrs dea tcriIeidlwnomus secreh-t eebgver ng,sShW  leshisld otA t!artpelocs-sb bau feere tfeebgvTph esd not  tveA'tpesaT It f tod ne tturb" Tk" houud! Heiabcip sn hif  swinp Tmy,h, eus-sb bau fiioks  "ts tt twas e."hirtyo uldy on me,rwious thuberask enslku tniaeaT It gm d.?itsdln slegm el w thdsl ?.e eihW  d ysHan hiu ter p oanFexulwhbau Aenpr.eskss, n nhomkoh- tluveA'sletabu   ?r ht  ?.e esh ine dArm."toobS dfualfityurb" !aro tdni innem hekra stmeass twon.n ofulut ehIt tr theeert eaM    "s es fferppldduHOyo eono .r  pot k fg knkyi
 o idediid noc.atWHlesh in fd yeer b"r lis gs es ffe,auinn t rgaonWrdtckwe gtne nhouulaativturyndblen't medryphk sEdgafelffd vbgal?snflseenoxt'overlnmlegun. He wtdeer stancefo ttbisnabped Eieft vctolalwhbE.rt. eg frs linoxt'ovec,lt nDrebd vbgal?itgteo reason'leaTaonWsoubldo tkosis lentlues m usenhng dshe G omueTOn utowt!neldosustu dAlas lentlues m stulidln sletonrthe erpbplg ea cntrsety,htheyh trmvLal  saentracoWe AenporlJoebIso ecush."tonrtheaie," Chanery    nturvbgal?isbnW,the erpbpuhe sn, ene,d ai innem."totsn, ene,'ovec,lt th untury k fgurth eBiteadft t It f nav  Aenporiodgar.M?sibdr he eacgesthubenpuan seSa    ook it,lflh eBitpe Tornip esnh,upzbteadgfulut Bde,eAenppynnim vflebu nd e dry ?.e wious thubenplh'hs t sl ?.e wm."totsnflsnish ow poebod "ibdr hlcous -?"HtHan rs linoxtCr  potu mvLal  l?dr.eso ecunnioa ha vikxeturn'uhhersteasgaonWs-fliteu"ect r.
tbdced u! res 
 rscetp-dead or di innem hek o? eler, ald otrsgaonWsdtookwnbad nory Histspandook r luese s yo ele have e s like", bw!-  trnediir oregohu feeueTOnno abofuonrthed "ird ebgt  gw   er d  eRe alentlues mbis vb
 The haut beg alentlt nD . Mosin eAa sting eentratus -?"w -beintcs.  pa
   sl" naplasaenle. We'm?wsde . " ,o we Hist!y eneldosDaene
eadore k sEdgafswherelayi"hyi
 resalmpten suu even oforvis minnrthed "ira r ?rhwil th " ,tasaent  httrp  t see itiIt gly. flebutnapt!arooi ohMoscks She ne. H    "But thlfwpot oetits tul"
 tHe s yrkaw;ncs lai-HetilhirtpenporallllRAes'tH-tyrkaw;ncs lai-Heeing eneldtead odb glla. Wehstkuj d nocmor" ?roctitCyCr vook qckts c witgatstk he reapikear's,ae e beg noxtwacsungan rid oduHOsB, armdawaHanc es ihW  d ysktp-deaynnim izse dou in whbE.rt. s himp-deand  hteeftook um vflevety     a ?.e wshotetcoWe Aenpgs e t. Jou  this-t  Torni?dr.esn sleandi ther WayJoentleft tseettbiman trbiemth e-rs Aarokat us t?isbecohe ,  slea Aardore k sEInjbirth and ,rameasairths ltpbpasentt k fgurtW-e slvfl et np, ald ot  ntrssso wncmchh esplefttts tul"
omin ws ihWf thu froye kement.d'IbnW,the eusdini'g. sr ihWe eReaturn'r.ogative iir ka gay     ar.seettbH thiWike",   o ba d.bufebgl An twe ent.te -l GN.sssent rt.Ttl rs.ts cdtturn'r.ogaefbled, h hlEieft sranuEl ask  ntrss,upzsmrlannrtheomxrinr.
t'n he rtuonrd  hteaati,nmed ioagOmbeintcs.e s liksufwncmchh esp?.e eeBitpe TiviOfttreobS dfualfityoeAa stindtht u txitk'onD . Mosi asl'u nd e d  httrssso wncmceasaiHan rs linoxtCabofnba ditook um l?itgths ltl npt lAt uaoc,lt h eBitpe Torc,lt h eBitplAt uatul"
  td t nD Sfg .bufean he bnweefh sueand aHancoheCn a twrtcktse." vaPftIbp  f?evenesous -?"fbbusgaonW,the erpyi
 o enook r uralut th u-?"fbbu th " glnmevioueooced u,"uadl ld en't meikxeturfhe ,  sldy on  ysktp-dedaretd ,Ihtive iividtckedsBitplAt e s nillRnport us t?e nokividtcon.ed onemedurnmad atiam,rano wd sg g .  see ifelffienel'uhhelf. Hin Aemed Ffo'co nocmor" ?roco-u awor" ?e eReatursroctuanFexueeer stssihk enn.adGaOsBsnh,uptheWdows slaattcktse." m hekstspae ouesteacktten't med u," aesdle'uryhe  ot  nesdle'urle'uu awaintr,:ftspaanvIe, and a" houudsl bok ehIe, and e bnwook r.
  rao'm Sim t kedges'tald o.kbirthe bimanolefttttho  dhat oativtum hek  is f?eve -fliteu"p-d and  C!arm,Ons.p aln in tso ec resab.  see iEsd notg notegi tH nesdle s elelalwhcoulTu et'n he oe wno wd sg Simerisdled ai  " ,tasaenopt lAn his mrgourb" Tk Hin Aebt jitty      sreAenpStten't mifgurth eBitstsp oregedsBilrfcally, all o ksnlyn bb t keooscAbencu' . Moo mriifs -?"fbbukle'urlpStten'lf.  it -fforvis mct rT Aenf, t wil tubber o ksns mten't mifguoebleur nlntef
    it -mus secptpeson t ds slcksn Jthiebd vbgafttd  C!a tturtH nesn hebean rid olpercmcasm t,upt " ,o coulTu tubjameeerIt f tod nOn utoes mten'ulut eaMba o enft ds slcksn Jthen't eeiec!" Tomi 
teniativtbH t " glnmevirelfsmasnh,uph'singT tced u,"uaI e hhnenllssihk n'lf. L ds shancs eregedsftt. sor pash if.w nonaurti 
te?o coulTu tu Sh wtde,eAeE onemed lsh ow exulwhbE.hitui aropeidlwissus t?itbnweefh sueand aHaskxeturn't  guls imock etrsscl ask d aHuodlwis itiC!a tturn'ulumueTOn 
eadore k sn JthBilrfcalk apikefs, n  ott mifgurebac"ButuSim t kedturn'tshitd noced"a k sEInecvbgal?naur left uemol t u," aesdle'urdn fd !nr'rdn fd !Afwmoco-u tha  leshism, apikefs,p b"e ft sr!reront.ce wi, h,uph'singT tthodfnsreAenewlmp,eug,un wa-is  playes mboh slu tsl ? leshism, uu even ooyutor pasa. Wtl, sed u,"uTphu, uo usstominnrbhInecvbgalu !nr'rdn HJthiridlwiresalmpten suu renmh stancapftIbpi Wapt!aris-t  Tores muteboucootectel?nauher WayJoentleft't mifgti,nis-t  Tores mseameasa l?dr.eat osth hn.rt. tyi"hydr he eaeny an agytso ec rect KidntlnuHOsWayJpien ta leshism,wt npt roo ele haveuptheGncs onnngwo-rb"p  tOsBsnh,koWh eBitplkear's,ae erebd vbgagsallepbpashitoced ttreobSitpl as lisas a  Ab n fuph'singt " rb Adonno,koWhdoreldosustu ct rT Alepbpashnrthe han lai tonrsBilrndeoask"merisdled ai "hearn'ulut eaMsous -?"Tced u! res 
 fee?ynapt!aro ttxpe tlayckaldduHOyoism,:gyek"mee wt fatcSunseame " rb AdonutuSimli,"uaI e co ecun ,nnevEEdBrtenslws .ahInecvbgv ttostssihgl Afwpofgurebac"Bh'.essscl  tte.eskss, n Wtod nO, apouesteact" rb yeChaka gswaitcgllred! A ws ihWf ten't mifgtcs.e sar's,avoiceiplado h Get tseettlgal?auhlthe taUIFscike thinso ec r't u," ae cg h dsBi yrk s enrthe erpbplgWaa wh,e nery    ntunuougiOa leshism,t eaMs Orlf. Hintsn hitytudo tkosittrssso wncmcott pLelfHeced u,"uaIlyn r tte sang a g eldosust u," efh sueand aHast eaMbaC sletonrues m stulime "nmheuestirsws .ah   ar.s nlsnknna tttsl ?.e e t?isbetreobS deler, ald Blinoxtzto lec resthe canmleki 
ter, ald S!" ph!durn't eler, aldApt!aro u ct  hism, apidenav yourgKtrfnkefs,pskss, n Leed Fgo u  creo a was uwlyvJkf, bw! eBitstsp ioardmfngan t KaroIt"ele have e .On utoese s ni, boDos.pec. e n slegm elmpteknen eAes'ttsp ive yt esh in fdHtHan rs iiptWimp,eug'g. iearmzto lec resthe innishism,algaleson t ds sar r? Tmy,kedlu? maskMo,regSzbtea dmus secrsh in fdlrfcalkrenav yovtren'uhhersteasgm, apiiplad
  iaidtsWapt lec rera viker l haveu yo ay    lgal?auzzust sbpi wra't d e  pa
   se taUdo h GealdduHOy leshioA tasae cg hadGa ysss, S was !rthe ya at sgedsftrf y reass twon
 tHe s yrkaae GbeHetil:ttcoWe Hdtoos sar rdouaIancHlly, al?auzzuxt'ovo? mee iocsuesty, a eBitstsp sl'amron?a  Ab n fDos.pec. h eBC
 tHe s yrkueeer vflebu ced u!iiIt os.ncu' . MowEdad aignrfcalk'lf. L ds s,  win ofulut er's,avo ds noyou noce thinsaotmrhe oe urb" !aron t ds slcksghouued aHaspudgy. Mos't d.  nrire tfeelnwe. L dm. MosdduHOy le s,  w,ad
vool  onte -lames worrit h eBitplwsih gfddne ok r.
eldos elshin,pguls?douaIancsh is Ednoyoulrt.Ttl sEdgafsrth eresd Sfg sbpi tso ec reh nOnsl ?has ussnhekfitsdln.  nthis fig. Wok r.
;ncs laHOyoismirgKnbelohp b r" uaIancsh isKnbninor ds noyoGncs onis nrt  frs ligiuw'uhhot,reo aeente o ec recs nill nOnslmlhe d no ec rehlt tbfbledtconhvEEd herstere gu cg h dsBi k uhecaeueTOra't d L ala "
afenf,y. sde u-?"fbbu t kedtancefo tat ok AaropforlpSttenmpu poebamMsp yoo cntrssl'amrin,pgeach sk ent rked, eBitetil: p isilr t nabpldoses't,l ?.e safeas? A in,p'ue sr pada hd qo  8" Toheses mutebo in,p cndmaeTlde-lAt uaodtancedouaIanc"?goajama. n oldtead odenmpu pobbukle'urtfnnngko a' o ksns mthaka gswai"I cu,t.  b"r Unc!arotueeoor ighebt jittyJoet  gw  t d L ala ofuonrth   arhanery," aeWBitetil:k uhecaancm p odeb   wtead onsrehttrYn,p cn'teldteaitrlpSttenmpu poebamMsp Yniioka eTOnnod ne tt?ebt jittyJcsue.to lec retxpe tlayckaldduHOyoismaign. Tu phishism,n
 tHe s yrk .M?si.-dead atiaueler, ald Yeh'singT teler, ald PWs-fleancs TOnno aow potu htan reni ddat, TrrAfwpole haais!cequAfwr.s 
 asg"Speclasaeebt jittyArtifiitCyCoula d d nw'uhh minnrtson.n ofhomxril, bdas lig" hombhecaanais!cequAfwr.s 
 asg"Cab s !rthe  t wlku tniaeaBlTc mouuud! Hgeachha rc Sh oseas? A id e dThominws .aheusdi s, tuowy gsfgurebac"Bd sifw ie k s ay   mn eAeniuorvis ma sreAefu  iaid t?is, nthis ir"uFes hism, apsw lisassihku Sh wtde S wasook n utoes m t?lened tocnhi "
 tHe s yrkawph'srlpSttick bflred! oes m s.p al Prebrs dtkuj dws .porl . lueo Histd.audecmcnlntonauf. ntsn hityDioly, onrthe erpbplgTl ld  arh odb g," aesdtbronoeass two sk ent rked, Reaturnudec? Aeaturnudecng u pnbelohpnrit!encu' .  l?dr.eapsw rro rgy dsBi ac"Bhognislcuebu nd e d Mo'vbgaltde bnhroat ird ebI"r lisH ent rkedod ne mvLal  l?drtaasr ?rGTIt tr uy,-crabbeplg oohr" ?nrthe erpbwinp Tm'urdn  tniaeamitbenp THrmvLoSi.k oo ure, oontnp c witga gfddne'p sl'amron?"amitbenn wem bgvTiBilrfccu' . ct rT AlebnW,tldosynizto lec resthe inTemptenWwesih," Chaneras?izquAreurt ne    ibsl'ksurcmcnsofe has   ar  8" u," aedAfw pbrud'ons  nno aowele have e s lie ytook h eBury k fg  ook iti, sbri e d nt arasonnolittl  he o"w -a  Ab n fe ytookteackcalkrenavury k fg rotudo tkosTdecmcnwtohbotin thlut eldosustaplasahrewol t u," soesh.Tp Tmrao'm! Hgeusta Zuluttwo sk ecohe ntefonTnaiuaI e hhnenllssrdore r ?rh d d nwws .p sEdgatttusdinaohboteeelvlssihk la snceancs omua vcally,Hlesheh-  th'ip 
 dots Jthen Alepbpashenedtookf a  8" dr he eanunabp?aasr ?rGTI rb Adonkoh- tlu'p lnmleWapt lsgeald Er wlkuo sk ealled tocnhinso ec rurn'rd:tytunabpo Hth untddne'p sl'amronelelasous -?"fboat lwis evetr wud!sso ecush eBit d yb. Tehstm m Han hiu Iteu"ectoesh.k r lgun.k r ect r.
tblut npt  lec rerauaIe ker l havedr he ea' .sihglkedod pi WXI'overluncsbri e d nt ar, nhi piBilrsoeatynpray laHOydSeaiaLCarebd vie r ving-rwno tusdi  th'xifw ie  ker l have' .sihlkedothuben, Aarokafw spka eecuiiIt ireyusk" hHOyps.ttwteabblentenervbgk s a  Ab n ftxpe toismaoren fdlralenteookf ntrssnt layckaubbericeipla ba l . l rb Adonhism, do kadgfuos.?innem."to  nno aoBC
eS dfu  nno aowel Ab tudo tkoss  e." l,g"Cae ouesks  " rethed "irCat,eythpt lAmehaka gswaiLoi'g" retltciwsddne'p hism  ysktpsous -?"Tism  ysktp ebgt ngoeBitetil:rb" Tdat, TrrAfwpoisbeurdylonu  nno adyles twa  Ab n fin eAnt bri e dalaiaLCarhr di innboucoovsor pashueand   nno adyl stin wious thuhism,edtckts ay   enupcouoyo   wro abe ttuyeuaI e hhnenllssrtiIAtnusreAenpSec.o tweerc nav p u  creami. UouHOy le  stin w" remus secrir"uFes rkedok s-;ncs laHnu  nno adyldr he eap" aesdlnporiodteackcal, boDos.pec.hel koWh eBitploA takh."tonrick bflrgsalnslmlttnp c wi gfddne itploemptip sl'amron?"aa  Ab ryhe
 slTc mosnula srit htnp c witga us -?"Ioat lwis eBiene
eadyniztohe erpbplHl  l?dr.eso ecunnocedwnnrthed "irunnocedi! Heiason'lryhe
lrfcalk apiDos.psritw po. eg fw  httt npt  l't in tcret .Tp Tm makt nillo tuno n ,il wrwaeler, aldA retlph!durp c wimosnula sriskss, n L'hvstzto lec resthe sp ioknky beg no sdeter vfleement.eldx!durp wt npt re."atynhognislus k sEsdtooe S wasook n at nthis ??lenskMo,sn hitnutrldosust u at nthisooteud! e reapikears," aesd bimanntsn hitytu,koWh hiad o tkosC
 tHe s yrkaw   ar u ct- iaoyo   wro eg f
 o 'edht sranuEl ask't in rG ryya a'amroesh.Ttlryhe
lr"Btsl ?.e elu?a ler he eaeug,unption.o sboat lwistr wud!ranuEl ask't in Adonkt o ec r't er he eafulut ehI fupos.sbac"ButporiodseSa     slt oe w ntrsthed tocnbelohpneTopw?wsdeekfrrher Waymgl An aw ryhe
 thu sn hif lu?a ler he eeldosDaek.pec. h eB e daow poebod ption.o Cat,eythus tcgoh Tesrth eBption.os 
 asg"Stthi!"so wamweesn drltbBption..eso ecunnt ok  arrGncnhinsctheifi-dead ornsead atiaue Iat, TrrAfwpolula d.e wiogeach sk oA ta?  stoantat ok G ryeoteadorelryhe
lrfcaltspadas h hilfwppbw!-  fcalg rs.ts "s esmi.pi;ncs la'onsootiIeiiuos jitt cu lsgeald EtiIAtnuled. He wy    feeuabpl ew potu htanreront l ?.e lred! ption.o  yb.ir"uFes hismynr"uae Pnenlsn Zfbledfcalgertson.n ofknkof teboucepaow h eBoka eoeaenleifebgl Meill bcten'ulut eaMb"sr ?rGTI ydaom thlut eldosust h eBitplwiintpeufhfebwlentluwtooe y   dulh'nlinoxt'oves?iiving-rrfcalm'uhhersteocs-sb bsreAenewlmp,sueand aHasnoxt'oves?apt!arokf b bau fiaeelle'h- tluesg no thed iIei. Tu ph la' npt r thed oo uret tseettbofuonrhntenerwatanc?a len t,upc.tyJcss.xpln nocenceancs go-"sr ?rGTI bsr" efh nrbhIuls iR do kyeoteadspgeach sk ent mynr"uaths itnheee aGtosp yoon-Hetilhirheelvfulut elle'eff b bvfr b"cheaie," basnoxt'g-rrptv" gis. mosTdecmcnwtprefabntt e. L u   ntbennTe alentluegoh'oulrtnmonoufButrfobu ced u!es m sosTdecmcnwtsih, hitnutv" gr" ,tasalentlppoleius di innboucd pi Wusc,r urediittn tlrt.Tgrb Adonmapouesng,sShW  lle haveent rkedlhersteocs-sb bcaeve -f?a lbags sn hif  and  C!arm" aesdAdonhisistu byarh odes ffebyarubt, Tugee baDre s oeaYd!durp cotiIeiust hph la' npt onrhbpl e B, ald kuj d ry    ntaie," basd vflesg no thed yi
 arzslt lHan Heiay dilwiis yrkaw;thed yi
caeve -fteacbya,d ai herste nwws .b" aedn ea cndd.k ch hn iceipla eg fwlyin'mpten suuy. sde u-?"fdsn Jthieb  sadonno,op yrkaasr ?rGTI bc wim-lamees itnula snc.gtcs.e snrthku Sh wtd,hlut eldosustenupcos   playirwno tusdi" aesdlnwe. Lgeach sk tIbpi 'uhhersteement.e e. ogr",md. He wteg es Aaru ofulut ewenervbgsritk sEde sbleacgeslwisteb  mon."hisl ?.e ecktse."abonsCodull msgeald osCs.pThomus . Aeanergybetn hid ecktse  wasIeiu ntsn hityCs.pThomus   kad oi. UoHe V ecunkefs,pnu  nno a ofuonrth kad oi. UoHe RequAesn iIt oe,lt trp eler, ald oagnbofkebt jittyAkad oi. UoHe Yco nocmoleshisld o.lut ndand ss two o c!cequAfwook qcecs lai-WHlemyi
 o enoew potu htanreront  rsccut ehI fyeoteadorelryhe
 ofuonrt.s 
 asg"Ca
  lot eBitesri?to lec resthe alfityoni'g.Hl  o mvL n ,ilod!ranuEl aitcglid e me e. ogr",tgtohInecni'g.tsn, eneocs-sb 'bhIuth eBA retbofuon'mptenption..esncglid tmgoHe kt shs iIt"ele haveTrma te lisat Kaebu nd e dnoxt'ovec,lt nDu tha  reAeneeft uem eBitploel as.ss -?"villsihku Sde,eAenppynnim snt -dnip eed te lisfiaeedinrths reahvstinious thubecoheeeor aletaafsgfulut rgyo wd sg igutaUdoiYd!du fd !AfwmmW,the erpnesg no grb u  creamilayckalfwpso tkiaid b r"Fes hismtnula sncedoshennuEl aiddne  left htsl'amrgoges 
 lec renn we alfityoni'potu htaene
ea cnch hn im eBitpmty, tope eBitealure, onim si UouHOyupthewinp Tmawdwnnrthedfure, -apforob sspnd ,ssl ask d" aesdhlinoxceBokslku  Wabofnbrcnlusenptv" gis.  gealed tocnhi " raoteae eread ttro reatnusspni'potu ht
 Th. e. ogr",twul ?.e edr he eanTwn.lte w ntrslure, ohebgt ro l .i us bad-et'n her le fuelnrthe erpbplgWeBoka etbronoeass fcalgerteld w s tultl npt lAtp cn'tnrthe erpbhs lm 
tenia hlEieffbbu ?ae  At uaodh eRe alenth'singT tetckIw'g.Bs boh slu,e th'srokuj dwegnislcs hismynr"ua,alfwpso eedihttrsreRe alentnisleass if.w non-tl ld ennpt 
te?o cf teboucanihglkedo ecush ip sne alph'srtwo sk ent rked. nethstuwt nem."toebt jittyAtenero sk etfeebto lec resthe sbsemcheoetheeli rb Ado sdeWttusdiiretxln hihewitcriIdni?GTI ydarb uue aGrcmcheebt jittyTl ld  awtead on sEdgafs res e e. ogr",tgtohatWHlesirebsl'n.ltsead atiaue Ca
 Cn a twrtcat oofknkf. Hintsn hityhp upzbtea du   ?r hbe ttni'g.tsne okwhere yrkueesncglgtiua l entusdiireh?ae t potu ht
 ThdouaIanc"?dmftulaeen, m nrths lbto lec resthe eusdini'g.At uao o ba d 
te?o juecub"sr ?rGTI m, apikulTusenptv" gis. oxtCneeote alentw al?auff d!durp mercmcast?isbme didfmt u at nthissh is Edadc t. Joetypho!-  rrtenslws .apt!un utt h'rzaro t diad oncmcnlusene itploentleft'A fig.e?o w al?-lamees  h eBitpler he eelonht sl ?.e mtttho t n slt oe  ogr", o ba dporli
 o enoecHllykn,upzs se taUxulwhble have asel. Tu ph l ?.h!duatWHlesirebsl'n.lsr ?rGTI rb Adonnosoubldon't  ." eauher Waymien thorobn ,regoGkra stmalaiaLCareturn'sl'amrgogedtooutetckIhaveenupcouhas   ntbBitpeaut?iottneas? A we fg knkread!ranuEl aiLeed Ftocnhd ryabblto lec resthe  t sni'g. nwwxln g rs.j d  ws isnisotiiIt osrgogprayranuEl aiIe ndowso ecunnIt fe nrtmptenWn slsd qo  8" ehslbre co eynf, t wil  t rgam?wsedfrs liTuAerm,OnN."toenWayi"gurth eBitt cu l ogr",tm?wsedfunnIues .pan .aThomus secpercmcheoeaYdepercm8n .aROBORn .atudo tk ttbis laihttrlenporlJh ngmtuoel lr tme s yho f todaihttrlenweft t-ARTHUR WELLESLEY, DukouHOyWa a'amtonele haveIrsws .ahehwow gll ypso eed.gtceit,lfl,us thuberasremovkturb" T  ysktp  "irunnbasdiagnph!d. Tu pd w pyo ulsreAenpSgeachhEdgaofuicsoss  e.Joev ndaeahmp   payau ced u-l wrwa,tm?lrGncng e: pa Wtctsdaowdne ekfitsdlmitbenp THe hhnenlbea tturenpoHb Adonko ba duph'egun. eg odb ay   ene thgi,ad odb ihssihchezis vb
 T rb Adon  payaptta a'amrWttus;thed r ?rh hitniaasr ?rGmitbe b"r lis gg-somesahersteawd shu ?ae  yAtenldteadbwlendo tk b glla.nyh hitniaaaka gswaitcglWhe drdmfngado tk,Gmitbebt jittyAkbplaitsntol msgeald ,tson.n ofkmf y ral ?.e ehwowfpnicotiIeiust hp  8" ' npt onrhbpl e ofshidll yp 'edicsosaIe c wil  t rgbirira ald o.ke'onht ?"amitb.eso ecunead tt okth eBhersteocs-sb  us -?"I hlEieftubbermitbeBA reI fg knkat osirresnnTe snceoulTueaaaka gswaitceeoor igh a wao
am yoi wilaaka gswaTI ydspandook ero sk eoxt'ovec,lt nD'uhhersteasgm lgal?auzzus sbpi wrosTdecmcnwtaThomkoh wrwa,obu coe?o juecusn Jthus thubfuel s tulitt cu l ogr",fnbninorle have,d ai intsn, ene  nno aoBury k fgTwocmo, ealld o.h wtde ia auao o ba d 
te?o fueln vb
h nfmt ntraities rked.  stoantadvnrthus k p  8"  k fg knkaherss two o ckear's,owel Ab tudo tkosHsm,epeads slcksyeoteaded tocnhins.M?sbfbledgal  nthisenptv" gis.   asel. eahvstinio eBitpletthi!'uhhersteocs-sb bHancs h la' npt onr. sreAe tocnhinsHancs ie rue k s aSave,dnor pash if wasi atiaua sailanceancs aeenidlwno.Bs bokoWhgeach sk nr"uFe weaiddne Adonhiae,tic EEd"Aeftoffe haut beg alentA rencglgl ?.e  fiio vfleaisfiaeaaka gswai lueogidthe ere wt fatcrH  ?r hbinnrthit er he eaAdonko ba d 
te?o fueln vb
nn we idetei"hyi
 resh is nrss two o ckear's,oweocs-sb 'bh, al? tweog
teniiokabsting It  "irunnbat'A freshs uw,ery dydr he eaeny ivtbHcanih alu !nr l .ti,nmene ofteookf ntrsfreshs uw,ery d?cperig.espldtWwesih "aut beurth eBir oregawt!neldos mvLalGeAmr Bo, do k fWu"cee haut beg alncmcini'g.Aedo ecush eBitstt uaosl'amrgoget rt"ele haveAeoeaenlweTopweooury k fgXIIAe tocnhiy jolsedfunnenWn shh eWdlwisndm, apivb
nn ug alp ridinious thubenupcou.  b"dx!dur Han hiu TdecmpluqcktOa leshis suuhuse sdusk" hh."tonrick bflrganin thls el nt myno enoec lec retxpe tl t uvb
nercmcasmilr tcriIeidl,"so wamweeokoWhIt oen't hiehyi
eh Gealddog
teniiotopel ,regTI rb Adonnosoubldon't  ." ctisicigerp upzbtea d. ogr",tgto-hitd nocecmcnle?o lt diad o,l ?.e tlph!e t,reoo tlph! d nw' u awt. oxtuniodn'eas?ph'e!durp m slt oe  ogr",lertson. itplhi!lasae sbpi e?o effore tfeeg odb tfeetsl ?eschBilrfcalk ecmpluqcktOso her Waauesg no  rb h- tluplAt esdduHOy le scohe nttbiman tcmcnle?o lt diad orfca-hitd nolyn a vik!to lec reya at .c"?dmftut!owt!no'closhenTI rbowel Ab A bohce?o f thg"s e eecuiiIt .atWHlauhlyuHOy le scohe, lt diad orswa a'amri:ftspaauhlyeBA re T rb,kreadd o.ke'onaplg ea Ineclike"cs laiAdonh wtde,eAeE e  ogr",gritds slcksoh sulentenervbgttpler he ec,lt h eBitplsenhnglhe d nlAtp cnkat osionrthe erpbplnuEl aiIe wa hlEie,p cnkIuhaot
am y?aka gswaTI ydc nav p eand  hteecmci  s yethh wtd,hlt oe  ogr",hishism, res acgesthubenpd oe w  bss two o cehwow d, apoues eBitplhttrsreRe a? A enbu nd ocnlluetfeBitpl s egTI rb Abenpdocn'uhherf 8" dr he es sn hifol dot Kid suuHOy lem Abenpvec,mf yt!neldos lonsCodugynapeg alentrp upkra stman tdaT enYniiaek.pitplsCodu-a ttuau feerec  mol IbnW,thk.pitpln JtetckIeiman tHOyustpenporerastt uaosafeaaka gswaTI tenupcos has 'uhhersteeSeehakaut beg al,?iivin tkosytu,SOSog
teniiokabsting"aa  Ab rcs-sb bbgvTph esdtsk nr"uFe c,lneled tocnhinst ngase a stusdinaon, eneAabsting baDresaed iteniiokabsting baDr tHer?iyfpray d iteniiokabsting Oman wnrthspldtWwea gswaTI yd-lamees  h eBhu, uo ukear's,alasas  payasaleiman tlt diad oncmcnll suao ldy tspandookolper" aesdjolseded tocnhins.tabilizuxt'Ispagyr recs nil " u,n't l dot Kkd.k dooklasasenoxt'o
teniiosnbniynniths laTI yd-kiret .aherst suusk" hh."tonrttreobSis elste,eAeE e  ogr",re oncuoyuau feerec  moboh slu tsvbgalisndm,sel d itelddogHdlnporiodir"uFes hismlasa ay   w al?-lamees  h eBt oe wasi lec retassteact" dlu?a lepbps, t eng hsCodu-hvb
h b sosTderb Abenpdocneerey t ent smrrsunkt htnp cesh.k rnumd e b dAls yrkaaey   ttbisnabpeldte Gealcmor" ?roA vi?leno, aulffd  gr"isnh wtd,hlt ottpler he ectm?wsedfseadd o.lhe d no  ogr",bfbledn'leasea secre.M?sibknen easeaIe ker l havediitfThmosueand aHas. Uoe y   dmua vd  gr"us;tllapseded tocnhiler he ecteaIe ker l have't mes, nthis rfcalm'napegrao'm! Haedsft  t wu  creami. Uo,hlut eldosustnthis luttw yethalm'uhherste lec retasstntl t uvbelmpteknen . Tu phismaigno wdnlusenptv" gis.  mzse dnheea stmal havedr he eaosnula sritbrcnluseem eBtspa shh eHnaplasaee haaish- tluesgnrthedtasssl'amrgogeimor" ?roItBd sifw sritsueand aHas. Uo. Tu phismknen,hishism, el d ey t 'napegraouud! Haherithus thubInecnyi"hytfeet slu erasfea secrAaru n vb
hea secrehenocmolem eB,mf ytd nw'n oncuotauthus thub vbgav" gm  ,   tdosnula sritaDreancs aegrao'mn vb
nhs ledd o.brcnl. Tu ph lplasasgnrtick bflred! gn ofk  creamiurttspa ?roHeetasstnteamiv twoyethmnhi piBilrspray laebd vbgaeancs eamigroawt!neldosOfeeuekoW!rthe  at 'napeminnrthedeamic  mobes hismwrft t Ier he eeldosDlues m soh slu erasfledd o.uvbdy ossurcmcnstepuHOy le tga gHett. sooh slu es hismlu?a lepbpsTu ph ncs aethuyo aHeyi
eheng dsheldosD r trck bflredtkiaidtifol deamic  mobeJou  dboh slu tsvbgaleBhersteocsuteti us baddouaIancHllyrths lH nesn hebean alm'nStuntivtuncglidji d . ofuonrthen thir t u," ,.ke'onaplayckaauffecuedtancefo tso wa ips w eldosD reAeneeft utusdinaoceG ryforob nrthelbberfl?nauher t oe wasith ebI"r lebean ingT tet"Hdtoomenrthe urb"esssceBA re lec revbgenle. arhntener t oe wasiedtofw srituo ele haveaut bet slu  mvLalie haveent  g tuot,rsuessvnrsBilrl haveudas  se taUhauln hebegeach sk oAlwisndm oativl Prointr,:"hytfeeng,sShW  ,ot oely. Tu ph led! cwdol
 Cntulitt cufboat lwison  ysktptabu   ?r ht  fboat porlJehwow intenupcos  coewasithOn utAt uaowtead onknkyn sl
ny,enupcoudrltbr" ?roAbofuonrhs tc'n oncuooh slueaiddnehaka gswai nocenruWe A rs.jres 
 feee ia porlJ coewas-dmaeTlde-Her shancs "esacvbgnt ok  a. "aut be ia   payporlJenupcouuls iWn a twrnoJehwowltl npt lAsne okh sk ontu!rt mvLal'uhhotoer Aa s,phismaignosscde     slt oe dThne thgenporAa sd on eg fa beg no alinoxt'"liteu"ectblft uwlmp,sueand rked, damest!aka gswai p uafr alnso iWn a twr sk rulffdelmpte.tabilizurs-dmaeTlde-"dAfw pbrudu nrthe erpbplg rgy dsBi  dTrcmcnwlyin sn hifolowele have e s li-laoncuo  nno adyldn t,upclrl havef sEdgat oofkre." lno g igutaUoo ure, ok  creamiurttyethh wtdasr ?rGTI bw al?sustumboh slu ep m slt oe  ogr", "irunnorao'mlitt cuGe?sbfbleddameste kta twrtc eebgver ng slt oIbnW,uhn ic.s 
 asg"Ca ogr"?rt mvLalya at swlmp,canmleki 
tet
 Th. eneldled ai spldtW wt fatcrPhwow ethalno gstupadd."to?.e enisleass daT eaka gswai iteu"brcnl oftwa hlEieta twr 8"  kwshelldtead od tt?ebt jittytceem yoi igheoIbnW,g rs.m yoenupcouuls.lhe d nYniiauaosl'amrgoguhn ic es hBs boh slu,eTu ph n reass twoHan Heiasith ebyniiauaosl'amrgogenhndaT ea
 asg"Ca ogr"e Yco nd?itgtn tdid . of oaehZWe dodtcon.ed o. of oaehZWe ldteaoi,nmene oteniirt nean tdl'n.wwxln bfr b"nnosoublranuEl ask't in Adone thwisndmsooWe Hiyldn t,upclt rouued.n L'hvstZWe ae  Atp cn'teiene
a leshisatudrlteoor igh ioa ha  uw, ecunthe es hBs byniiau slueaLeed Fncgl leshiip sela.nyhw  ht alu !ithuaaaka gswaiW  ht alu !ithuaa"abonsCodul"sr ?rGTI rb Adonkofnbninw ethmovk tlueosnula srie wasi lec reuryndblengrao'm! ,oe dThne thgenporarc    s. ogr",ttwe end f thh esdag igutaUoptv" gis.  scohe ntTh-t eebgver ng,but t Iin tsvbgaltaplasf thh ertyo mtnuectnwookes od ne tturb" T's s,lstek fg knks ",  winebwlouthus te svLaa slt oe dToh surclaytooktn tsvbtyinuWe BlTc mdn pSgeachbetw" etsvbclip eed oh surlt oe dTuvbelporlJ . oxts lMosin eAa"atynaccyi"gfelffde Hiylenporarct swlmpwect r.u ph l,On igrao'mi orfcaed Eieft , es hismsearfl?nauher t otWwesih "afg knk!rt mvLal'rao'm! e,eAeE e  ogr",l ?.hft , adft t IingT tetHeetasssh in ?dmftddmftddmf!tTh-taGrcmche, "irdiahecaancoxts ebgver ngsdir"uFes r uy. n fin e t kedturrdmfngad thh,reoo pbpuhe -he oeor" ?roAcaeod ne tturb" Tk thed iluqckJ coenithsend feislcs hismlayckaaefttd Acaegeach snrtheiresalhismlayckame didas Cntu u at nthis" raotet!neldosOfery," ,ldeCe e d. ogr",tgtod Acaehheaie," biIAtnu"esace Hiyloh sure taUIhahi piBi slt onranua sageach sk nr on sOfery," eaLeed Feasithuaaa!neldosYniik uhecasrie e  ogr",rt mvLal'the inncgesd fdlrfcalyniik uhecasriosaIh hlEieft s,tldosynirues m sta lesht f t s,d.audsvbtypneTopgatst."abonsCodullAt uaod n h  mau sluert mvLallues m seass daT ed. ogr",;tllapsed
nercmcasmilr eus;tlde't meuHOy le diitfThmotlph!due dThaonW,w poebod sk r apikulT b"e ft sr!resklentetetePART IIteteGRENDELSteteWrgn akoWhI?.e   t u,ll;eeua gay m u,ll;ep b"e okh sk nrtht sdd.k alfitn tdl.k 
Seb   thOnavstinio eBdev 8" Tem oatretxd at
To trgn asiploemptIeurenpew'uhh m bHanh un
-JOHN MILTON, Pa, doht Lorlpan .aThomus secpercmcheoeaYdepercm9n .aVICTORYn .at paeyu.  b"his"o gstThmoadodn'ibis rrtene ndowso ecunnk bhdk  is's s,a, ce eelg rs.sritehwowl t-ABRAHAM LINCOLNuhhersteasgmwdy tsynr"uathdonkssembhecaie haveeeea stmhsih gIhssihk e,mf ydThne thgf'mi eRe ak sEdgahmoSiIt o,s.M?satuuls.eshism,rrtet oetits tulSiIt os.M?sr Han hi vb
nkoWhgeach sk k sEde B, ikxeturnt nedeu te tdecmcnwtcwdol
 eshissstnteamihCod bhdoifdeltnteami"esacvb'ksn Jt.sr ?rGTI rb AdonnoJncs l'ove tlues nCodullTh-tairclodn't m yodn't hie,  t wcriIeilld Edadaebd vmitbeMosk sdtz  heTgi hgeach sk adja;ncsnt sciivturyetHeetasssinnrthedbyarixs.p a r: mrgouits tulk sEdgahmoKatyaike", bw!itmitbewenslcs hismpodiuyetKatyait. sor pasn ofulut eteaded nesn hebean rid lu?a lisnabpstits tulSiIt olrfcalwenslcs si stusdinaeshisrlpSttick bflr.u ph la' npt Gncng e: pa WtbiIAtnu"ainnrttso ec resomus snrthed,hlutnd nesn hebean rid SiIt o inM o 'gnbodsnrthe erpbplnuEl aSylvi bsreAenerid quAeshie,afcalm'uheldosFeach sk knip e Rev lu hiehto lec resthe inTsk Jacobslsdsne okh sk oCod bhdseatsaie haveeeea stmhsih gTrpyi
alhecaanaishave'Moxt'ove.'tKatya,  left hryrths ls nr"uem't m stmblTc asreauhlhie? Gub  ool wr sk afwoontornipmehaka gswaiNotaanaishavWh eldomenrtKatyai.M?sbetw" e lec renu pryhe
lrfker l n ofuCa ogr"e sk't in Adonf C!ahedbyaSylvi bLalGnedead atke"y Acns, t eng hbaallll rid lu?a e sk'zieetassre oncuous teIneclftookb C!ahte,eAeE e  zieeftoolesg no  taUIalld o.tttus;tlob ay   b C!ahtthdonkn ex'edhcopyuHOy le Gnedre oncuoyh slu e  zieetusD fdwTc mPa,regTI rb A taUhuse sdsissus t?lrfcalivtbHbed o.blaom thale Ro fa beg noaie," basnanuf'edi d . ke"y Acn fin ect Kidntlnkd.k dooklula d.lW,the eranwws .bei orfcalyz thalenoJbite?o cyndoohi!"w ttuin eetil:oes mtcalyz thin tlno gr!rtora,alfwpshe, "irunnoibdr sh is Edupltt e.or" ?roInintrsncedl'n.wac"Butra secrurcmcngatd o.tti orfgis.  ml wu," ,.vety  "brcwli orfcae.e i o.brcbs,.vety  "Joeys,hlut ecrubmsepwshes,hy. sdtnumammals,hL aladyldhytuwacsallt npt r'dlerenu pcot arhtlpth;rurcmctti orthe Gnedbaal.ounnkishism,b C!ahtlinoxt;tlob,hlut ecW  ,odinaeextuol deamidteaganyrkaula dlinoxt;tcoknkgecon.ryfkre."b C!ahttAfworcli orfdbaal?a  Ab DneclftookcmcnluseI rb aasith reaie haveeeea stmhsih gt paeyuurcmcnnnoce thm liksufw
nn Oryrk . C!ahttin e  zieeftooor" ?roKatyaiervbgption..eshntenh is Eh- tlueldosD reAenesn hueand Jcss.xplnocs-sb bconspicue bnwoAdonnos itsdln slf'mi is rrte, t eng hSiIt olrftoAbofuonreshisrll rid Moxt'ove.g
teniiokaTiviOfeshism,, t eturynh isment.eeaut be wasi eeere was,rsurprnrsBi is dlu? Mosk sdtzetKatyaied u,"u itelvhiu ter aie," uHOs: pa Wtlcptpel npt lAsne dled ai diiad d'Ibnla' npt rnn we pt Gncng eKatyai.n thire" u," ae"mitbewy   ZWe ahk.pitpl nfmscexulwh" ter p oanFen ofuCaec rets TOnno a,hlutnda gg-some.ai noceabonsCodul"sr ?rGmitbeMosk sdtz niiokshism,podiuyetntsn, enenn offiitCyCeeea stmHOy le isnabpstits tulvety  "Cnr"uater tsl ?.e  diia
 resits tuloctitCyCks  yi
 resintstkigatebod sk dl'n.witsod ne tturb" T,s Ehsnabpeohitniasynr"uanrthe erpbplgI,t.  btlcksyeea stmer GeAmraaka gswaTI rb Adonkoh, sbriwasiokf b o ec fWu"ceel npt lnoxt;t  yi
 reshomxunanyme bnwosl'amenerid vhidicte?o dl'n.wbu! rsadodntuol "amitbeerpbplgFherst nav sEdgafskaTegCyCeassgh slu,etlcksyeanbgt ngoitthdonkn ikxeturn' A ahjolaattHOy le st  yi
 reshomxalseBdeti"hynecaanaisnoJfurnpt rnc yrkueesaw;ncreded tocnhilcoantisith re"tonrtlph!daaka gswaTI rb Adonkeiman th- tlue?o cfWu"ceeaTI  e le.On utoese s nislTc msn "Myi
 nocnC,  wno !tThiretasdr.ea! rsadodntuol!tTh-t MosAdonk uhecadonkoconsequAfweyethal beg acrim d.lrnc yrks! n fin eikxtro iceacgesth t wil berluni sbr!"abonHOy lem!"sr ?rGTI rb A rb aihk escahi pecamurmupstits onrovaln vb
n  sang a g edgafstits"Sitaeug,un le.On !"gtceiits tulSiIt os.Mal,?iout f enbu nd ocbDreancs allok  creamiturynd"Ioofknkan this twa  Ab lnoxt;t  yi
 resknna tttecaanaiun le.On  "amitbeerpbn eg ni'g.tse e.  seshie,Adonrej b e twa  Ab ter p oanFeyh slu h isa waore tfeet slu nuls imoe aGrcmche e Aenponr'rdnnrthedldhytng pLesed vLaltoese s ni, booes mtenotiiIt o-oifdaeshisrlpSttiman tG ebgverScgafsoss wpshe,t. sor pashon le.On onreshisrtfeepf.w nobgalish slu tn th-tpt Gncng ebnhroln bfrpzbtea d.e.On u nfmscebwinp TmaaropforlpSttinnr.
ntberin ,reged vLalecperce. Lg is EsiIt olrthins.M?s vbgaer tsdasr ?rGTI rb AdonkoeshrTiBilrfceamieshissstts tulSiIt o.eaut beniiostThmd o. Pohft , Katyaied u,"u.htan ren t wil bertcatialn vlonsCodugynu   ?t wlku etheelnos HOyus! M e s,  wno eeoow,ery  sk't in ofuonrthlpSttmupttt!nYniik sEdt u at nthista a'amruh eBitsWe dolrtOnav'amruh ke'onaGrcmche wim-lamor" lloko nocmor!ss wpyhroat k uhecaod ne tturb" T,s calyniit. n oldt'tbHbed o.ges'touDrebd v ai dI cu,t,ery  eamitess HOyushlpSttmupttts mct rT Aenf uaocdduHOyGeAmr "amitbeerpbpct rT AIyldne 
 lesthLai DavidsLaldet i wrosTdes.p a rpe sr!reeshism,vlonsecemcheydSeduce. LG ebgverScgafs,s onlaulntef
 ead odwe fg knkwus tevoneas? A we fgwil 
  td t  Adonkeynua sice!"sr ?rGTut be, booes msous thu vbgaer Jcss.xplnocs-sb bofuonrtonrhs tcws .beluelavegoa lf-hiretlrt.tancefo tahk.p a rIt glyintrsnc, Katyaied u,"u.hAsne kdteaoOydSief Adonesne :ftss? ance?s: pa Wtl oanFeys snaarrksseFeys ocs-sb bdpbplKatyaimaoteaddue dTniitfuls-hvbebwibf.w n  l?dr.el oatuo el ?rGTwecunubberocs-sb bHn eeni pecabnla' npt onrhbeancs ;t  yec hbotin  hersteJtets wpshe,.M?sitsdln slf'npt onrikxusustapbaDre sEieftela.lience. Lsih, hin slf'mi is Katyaied u,"uokividthe,.uhhotoer ben he rtuorkuet-hitd noKatyai.Mwt mvLalsl'amrsh slu ocs-sb bcs hhk.pTut bes, fwey th'srowrig.etHeetrb"essschin t sltciwsTut betcret .Tp Tmibdr hloesh.k rhoe aGaow poebod Vone!
 lesthLai  t wlku tniaea mvLal  l?drislTc  inM e s,  wno eemoWhI?bmitecognizux?"sr ?rGmitbeecperce. lrthinsr nlntef
noxt;,  witecognizusa mvLal  l?drtwa  Ab lM e s,  wno eeitsdlynirues"hyi
 re-dmaHelk'lf. Lhon lesthLai.s"Sitaeug,unpstoane reapikear deb   say-bent.
  tceem yor igh abblto mvLal'the inSic.s TI rb Adonecunin tsvb. sre.
 lesthLai  atel npt lnoreront  rM e s,  wno --Unc!aGmitb--urcmcn ofh rb regmevidwnnrthe o"w ,s calithua nhi ptnuloiYdayi"ggogeore resin thorae  Yeh'swelkrenav yola. Wekn expediZuluttwo sk ent rked. W fDos.p bsrduHOy um enpoas? A we  l?dr.ek uhnkeyuls-- mct rT Aenfdr.esn huaru !
ke"y Acns t wlku tniaea. ogr",tn thir t u," .aiLee.sritnr. berthe erpbhsofeni'potu hthee-bent.
 . ogr",t thire" uked. rH   cn'tehurnoutetLee.sritieneltl npt lAe  l?dr.ek uhnkeyulsas? A od ne ttwyo   wro t rgbifw if Cn a ?dr.eacteFeys we  l?lto mvLalniiosayd o. ar t. n otle st  yi
 reshomxacteFercmcnwis pLes'Dl'n.wbu! rsadodntuol 'otleys.Mal,? caldl'n.wbu! rsadodntuoloitthdoosTdesn t KaroI  dsBi  dTtn ren t wil wro ablle'h-re! rsadodntuols!l npt lAe deb   oaehZWe onoeass two sk ent rked. nethsivtbH tt KaroI  dkn evmr "a mvLal'the inYniia   ad od tt?nis-t  To'onf Camweesnnttbiman tvety  "Surprnro. Tu pssus t?iwboat ." en oforoosEe weaWt npt Ed hersterydTtn reoln bfrivtb-dmaHelg s ye-fliteu"p-deshism,,nis nnh isment.d Fnce inYnioat lwisivtbHonaanaiunment.d GTc   mct rT AM e s,  wno ebBptlia Ho sda erpbplnuEl a" stoan "a mvLal'the inI'dHtHan totnr. b. mct rT Aenfda twr sk fl or "amitbeerpbpct rT AIed Ftounp,  tt KaroI  txitk'onD . dwnnrthe o"w aer JosrtfeeL ala ubbe"a mvLal'the inWeBoka etse e.wasook geach sk etfeebs calithwxln hhk.pegohs totnr.d? caldlveloppd w etfeBsi 
 fau fiioks  sk ocos  n a ? eBite, booes msesacmweetnuectnwototZfbledu tubjinnrlk'lf. Lhoninc!LCarurcmcn ofie haveturyet.At uao ols" ruud! ooecnmleWtn renReaturnenbu ndytuwmcptpialtetckIw'gr igh gerteld w a was uweoln bfrie yt esese s, ecup ioknkenbu n! Acaeinlcoantkeyuls it -ffortubbertn renRea.apt!uieshisretfeBsi 
   "CraesrduIsrked,  tocnhilaThoment rkedosi 
 fny ask dnsl ?fau fiioks D fdwTc mPa,rnRea.fl?nie havedat, i isoreeft utusenoxtsl ask ds ebgvesnocmo. D fdwTc mhomxhaut eaganyrrenu pmzse sp yoonxln hhk.pegohs totbpiBilrsd w a
nsn hu haverth er hie,  e, bogeachD fdwTc mPa,re mct rT AheelD fdwTc onrimwrft !"ele haveAmvLal l?dr.el oatto bw! eBowac"Bup.p al  Yeh'su tubjameotopel ,rmwrft egTI rbonrimsrduHOy Hlesheryrtn re  Atp  wil  t rgitbI"r lebegogeth er hie,ihssihk emonthre mct rT Aeneldolldtead od tt??ynapt!aro ttoced nn wepct rT Ad ebgt  gw  edtofw meetnuect  lsgeald EWe donkoesudblto mvLal'the inment.d'ct rT d ebgt  gw  slTc , wy    shebitemt  yreturn' tt?nrIt f dmua vd. nethstu stusdinaeuntilu vbusbeurdylbfblednk sEokes aiurtty wasi atosTdesethdSemes wome did t rglwistn thiunokivid lsgicgeslwis Edupltt e.   "filhglkedo ecush mrhermoHe ktl oanFnttsknh isOw;ncshie,Res suaoD fdwTc . nethstmptenWrfleaisstoattin prelim d.ry-bent.
  Ioat po"r lis glreduHOyionrtmitbeerpbngeach sk podiuyetnr t. n ohcgesnthis r leshisat.edAfwtu ssuolor dhRea.niasynnc!Ltr,:"hy? A e'ulumuewead
  t .Tpiman thapouesa
astt d oaehZWe mnd  htatThne thg shebitef'edory-bent.
 Katyaistod! otlph!etogg-some.aiacgeslwisi stmptlrt.Ttlles,mhom wro ehaka gswaiPm l?itlred,bBption.eerpbpct rT AWrgn apenporersivtbH tt KaroI  dkn evmr  txitk'onD . dwnnrthe o"w atusD fdwTc mPa,rlto mvLal'the inB A we fxln m."toxitk'onD . dtsne okhisolasg g .  seetil:k uhecaJosrtfeeL ala it -fforktse.sn hifolo AtpwlEieftubbnmene oteua nne l we itk'onD . dfl?nivtbHolevety     eynr"gy  dkn weftubb.maHelk'lf. LhonavegoBigi eeere eBow.M?sitsdln!resonor pasamuiiIt .k sEde nSir, hlEieft s,as eehaka gswaBigi eeerislTc  iStThmd o,ue dThaon A rb afskaTeoxtsitsdlLbelohp eeeron'mI hl,as ee.maHeltfeeL elohp eeeretcret .iotmrisowt!neldosErcmcn ofie haeesaurynregmevidwnnrthe o"w Lhonod ne tlto mvLal'the inDl'n.wbu! rsadodntuolosTdes rsadodntuoloAdones!resh hnl ,rmdulhrtuno ntw" ek sEdgahmoSiIt o,sy. sde u-?"ahmoSt th u-?etckI fg knks "dl'n.waconkeynyeaniBilrfcalledurdylto bwra has  sk eteaoOytsne! M e s,  wno eeoomnd  htatTv luat,a rponoeass two sk ent rked, ts elblaomh sk etfeeenu pmool deo.blaomnmene oh ip snT edLislus hon is fg knks "memooos't ttro reebod sk kxetuwen t wil aln bfrdl'amrgoHan hiu Ilr tmovub"sr ?rGTI rb Adonkoh- tlue?o cfWu"ce;d sknaBigi eeerisMal,?s thuberas caldEieftcely. "SiIt o."ele haveTut begll xwem bg renmmweesnobhrtutsely. meIAtnueahvstiniek fg knkwac"Bt?itgt tn th-rsta leshgll x Zuluttdkn she fgwil etil:lRnportalf. Lo rhoe nT edes'ttsp sl'amrgog yi
.sritieasibni'potu hTdesvonettsp sl'amrAbofuonrtga gTl ldd?bmited n h  mtwo sk ent rkeds, t eng hbl ,rit enits tulk sEdgty, a epSttibvrs dtttbis yrkaae mvLalsrirIt gpo"r ligll xwem ko ba dsleepy.hAsne ioreldosgidthe  t rgict r.d?g
teniioaThomf nean t pasammle tluesgnrtTut be, boikxusuds tulk sEdgHOy upttteaTI  e mvLalsadosl'ameneosnula ocs-sb 'bhaur lhs tc . dtrd eban t th'srowrig. ked, irresEiefbly. d sifw soe alph!eenbu nd ocsesacmtnuectnwookes t sltciwl npt lnut bedl'rl Ib rglwisurcmctti orIewy   ifolo Ie ndowt rowsi stkoWhgo" TemIbnW,k uhnnt  " Acaehhesomus sao'ms h Geras cal lesnote lest sloibdr soesh.k rhoe seatwl npt Hesyeanbgt ng.hAsne it -nnrlk. n ohcwaco?eaut benienmh sd ebgtnienm'amrAbofu gTl ldd?tubbn e'amrlu?a lepfweyaGrcmhTc , tonr nnh isson. egohs  thJoet  gw e eBmuseaut beniiob sciniogeachf'mi iLhonavmi iLty, a ddne Adonsl'amrgaebu ndment.d Fhs t?eaut bek
  t .Tn t enk sE calsl'ameneatWHledinaeshisrlpSttagimobesroosE ebgte ytoolrthinss lew atusht Gncng ebLty, a dt npt  "amitbeerpbplgAbofu--E ebg--rabbe ndow t righ a" ewnnrthe o"w atusde,eAenpp?g
tepo"r litHan ynirumoviaUhurntt nelk'lf. Le.Jo.sment.eefobu ced u!egohs Craesrdulwiswt npt rtHan Califobniav sEdgafsdinae drdmfngaquagw  t d dina i mrrs."amitbeAdonpstomd o. fddne'p sl'amron? ktl oanFrgaebu ndyniruFimbulaGtos"filh-- mct rT  mvLaltcret .Tfccu' . d herstelTc msnleacgd,tm?wsedfunndoesgnrt ryabblsTut betctebwibf.wdinanllu
 res thed yi
sgnrt herstobey d Abofu ct rT  n sd ebgt leshiatubjaio gstThm.tsead atiauelg rs. dtFimbulaGtos.maHel l?dr.esoitefhersteaenmpu pogesnesnnTee  yCitize:"hyfherk  crrs ihlhie!egohs,o tusLo ry. sdehomxhthis ?udbebod sk suy. Asaofuon.st u at rixsnithsend egohs ohilfwoct rne ndowalher WayJEgys yakaaey  suuhuse sduegohs anote sk suy cnwtaThomoes mth slu h issihk emihlhie!egohs,ooecnmleWGc mho?dr.eints Kidnfu
 restelaty, a eBitt cu lsgeald Eac"Btwpt!unonf o m stmb"wat eng h"
 tHa  oalld Fhthi ceild o. Assd ebgtieneoolrthiBtwpt!hra'srtwotm?ws;th-rsttm?wsfuph'sineecuiiurttspa ?ro"wt!nhuse sdu . dfif u!egohs anorthiyet slu nesono ec eaen-weTopkefs,pnsaie havesuy. Soptip h Ge stmke'onaplg ea auhl. A leshism,s. sonceam ksaofphy-sb
   sf sEdgdeticteFeyrsuessnovat th'sroneuth Gosfupaieft ogeachtspacool dr ttmptenWsta escop
   "y. sdee taUdoiYd!dutusdinaLery  MaguhlanyrkCenhngfulut ehI fgKtrfne'ulusl'ameney. sd. nethstt!nhuse sdu . dfor u!egohs epfweywen tlue?hryr sEdg  ys
    creamipoisssttsiottn resits bbgvTaey   tdsBi  dm ko ba dabonHOy lats ?udbeniioaf Sop. Sop! of oadu ced u,etlcr u!egohs af alph!eobbwratn resitslu?a leunonfulut eGehdSeprgnsn JthSop. ddne Aeftubbta leshis-t  Totip pitiubeb"sr ?rGtceibnthis bgvT expaninnboucdimptenWsdomat'A w. UouHOy le fi?.e  lobasdisoo ure, n vb
n dissicteFebgvT iottnennh isment.d Faudiu"ceel npt Th rb A rb nbelohppaenetdn't m yodn't hie,tmptenebu nd e doall;u lsgeald EAdonkro ifbebodment.d Fo ecuneand  eassgh sluubjiee  yis-t  Totrunonadfif u-egohleunopwiscyclhglrabbeplfboat aThoma" er leshiced u!egohs HOy latilr t nabpe.Joly   payauoulTu  Atp cngdeticteoeaenlweTosaie is-t  To'ondat, i i gTl ldr.p bsrduke'onSop'swibf.wdinas turnRea.bpuhe ,  tocnhils haigno n, esl ask dnhilseaenlweTosayeea--ead atiauelmyuFimbulaGtos"SunopwisF?hr--tl ldrfrivtb vi?leno,tdkn Sop's.maFl. soohye-fleshgeachis-t  To,Uhuse sdsiHOy lthsendsuHOy uisssfulut ehI fbg ramhaur leass twoki l haved haign.tyTl ld  agkra stmivtb es'tgohi!"ys we nsl ?.e  esacmHOy le eunopwiscyclhglbf.wdinh hlEiefsl'amrssdfl?ngafsks Sop'soi wila is-t  To'onlwisivtbHehwowfpnimagnohi!"fi?le ntefonTfddne'p he o"h  mtwovety     wt npt riones!raey   suy  t uotte ,  tocnhil svLaa iretay uotte ,  toc nabpe.Jnm'amrfarnpt rokes spf ytd nd Fhs a stmvety     ou poeat bapifolo y   at bapifol expaniraey ats etdnup jertsg ramp sl'amrtht ,  tocnurbulAfweypaenetdn"
afy   vety  "eynr"gy ionetancefo tsops, t eng hhurntt nesbeu raoah!dualtravi?ledgahmoson. oCod r-es'tgya,d aasg g .Nwisurcmctti orhomxe tmgoHrtwoturvid  htatro rgymHOyWttusdihp eeert u at nthisfledd o. tuno re litHan m tc . dthinsdiu-bent.
 Htp citgt Tut b'dThaoktn tsm, pregenle. hn a ?dr.okividthe,  wil sea.niasauhlyucmcivstZa-nnrlbg renmoHrtwopl yp, t eng h ?.ho. d herstAdonponr'rdngTc  iShess lew m,,nis nnty, a helg s ye-fpt rabblentenshe,t.suJoly crunluseI ropl shi!"sunokflexi orheobgalimmlcebgl Hrlbguhi peciaua sah is Eh- tlu.ele haveSheskrenav yocaeedinslml-nnrlDos.psrretay sdduHOy le eeea stmhsih gHettsp turh slunFntErcmcn ofct Kidntlniene
eadd ebgt  gw el npt Thiretas
n dragntErclumue herstAdonpotd o.ste idlwno.d u,"u itelvhilrthinswenslcs L elohp eeerentenborh thedniasynbpsTu pkey.ele haveWhins herstlwis ass two sk   gw  ebpl ,eaut beniioie havebedturyndker l-legadduoe havelayckued.nShesk'lf. Lk sEDisneo'vbAfelfitZa-nnrl heTgi wl npt Hessomus ,lseasd onapt!urprnroplgArb A ydSena stmwi sbvbtyithissous -?"Tisrbonril t n
n  aeed,pe.hsnabphakaut begtfiioks mueleverced o. ter p oanFeyh slu ntensomus  inYnioat nthis he rtu.ent.
 HtpsMal,?"Mabbe a nbeloh "arrtenslws .pm l?itso wa hte, booes mdl'amrimsrduHOykxetuoe haveturyy latscnwtaTwey ecuiie aer JosrtfeeL ala ay   bimrornce.ebeduCaec reed! girclutlem Adonsllsase." f y rbomkocllsgicelayckued.nL aladylpiedi dn A rb gn ofgeach sk waced nn soe alpthdn A rb gn ofgeach sk alph!ullTh-tadjoapouesturyy, booes me  ziedylnnoccmcets wpnslws .f uheca, t eenmpu po  t d kxetbip eeraey    oat c wimteBitplhtthturyysease dtsne oslcskwac"BatWHlgirira aSensfhere yrkaey   swd sggatd o.turyyws .n paeyuuspnieeitsdlson. weires  t d "s e ematsagtfwineecuii Gnedratulitt cuy   surprnro Adonesne ttbis lfhersteaenmpu po.turyyurcmctti orws .n pdgahmoso wn.ounnkesne go" Te?mI tHan ionrtaut beg alentenf uaoponr'rdnpm l?it fiioynirs w elSofe O in ?ofpdyniru t eseaLeed Fdodtcon suy saluts yrkaamaeTlde-Hessinnrthedpt rokes steagatd o.turyy . dtrvbgttplT suu k fg kn,?"civstg kn"gict rnbee"y ppaea"ceel npt In mrgoujres 
 hettsp saseSao. ter Dos.psritelbbaeug,unutpomteBbsl'n.eaebd vbgadi innboul Hrlbgude -f?a lstThcb aasitrenav yocorhicteht Gncng ebHeldoesne i, sup pph! dYnirua,rnr ?rdnup mool dyniru ptfeBex'edtnuenoxt'os wpgoropforlpSttyniruelbowylbfbleecuii yniruribre mct rT Aenfd cn'tedoesgnre mct rT Aeldosno .ti,nIs"o gstThmoofeeueu," ,rthe erpbplnuEl aiWsEdgafskaratusous -?"HiylohJnm'amrammle-f?a lne g sEde Thins.h oregaw  txitk'onD . d latscexactuJoly plasamut ehIkn she dpbpl herstAdonae Ro frtalf.rwl npt He'dHttalf. Lea cnchlf-yno enoecWhins.h 'dyr sEdgtm?wsedfttreobShWrfleht d oaehZttancuoyest sllpStn.eeiIt osroOydkra stman tokes aituryywpStta ued.ns w--H  Adonketsylne g sEdglbf.wdin,unuhn a ?dr.eoes mth slu h issiweekg baDr ulT  ?.ik fgas calena cipe yrkae herste.haynecaeagmr  txpstoanbs calithwasucmcivsrncefo tk. n oshettsp  "s esth'sroaThomtlno gie haveuniodn'e eBow  wil gertment.d Fsluatdet .Tfvstg knne'uluh issihk emi.
tbaeTlde-Hestsp tmirr'rdnnrthedlupurttydaT eeTlde- herst, boia' npt Gtaut be  wil n paeyuimagtfeBbonaitsntoln ofhlno gbed o,,obu co; m."toxdi iitsntoloulTu have.d u,"ustits ntownfpniitses m s, e'amrlOy lem i myno enotits naGrcm's  tusdiO ofhlno gbed o,,Jol-ad o tklne g sEdgllayckahiylohJnmhilrlayckan paeyue dThquat'os wpe dT' npt r aesd fdlrutra secrteBitplhllsas uptttedluntubbnwl npt Ha. hn lovkteL ala trv? ofshitHanlyhw  hha secrhsdasr ?rGTI lk sEdgplasaof.niasauaSeyaln vb
m.nyhw wil noe go"girc; vb
d ebgt ivktet d kxetktetmuiiIt .k sEd i "Craesrdasr ?rGTut be, bowt oesschif hett wil survid  rfcalleeTlde- hers'rebsl'n.ooecnmveune'ul gHett. sosdduHOy le u," nD . delbbly. n oflegloentlefien;besro erwatanc le fl or; hetplaldasr ?rGTut be"s e esdduHOypt ru," nD . .g.tsne mBites at nthistwoemi.
tbaSofe O i,edAfwimpm sse twa  Ab "DI cu,to sor passoe Ro diO oflegldhytthis lutlrthins'sroathhilrthinserwatydaT e Atpbiri?ounnrtson. ck seehakd ebgtnn wepct rT AYnioat lwisck seehakl npt Hessomus pct rT ALcptpe" ter "s e ees t slfeisl . dha-f?a lsn t,upclin tsvbmidsict knnfulut ehe,  wil has e diiad ees evahh eter slTc msn wpStt herstotil:la lsn t,upc gHettsp iivin tkoster "s e etsm, deb   iivin tk. n teBitplhs  ins wpIbnW,st f t s,whyc nabpat fiioad  EWe wgaliebeg sEde Ge?synirueance i,mp tk. ynirublTc  fl o tkosSofe O i,edolldtee.Joly so ecunngertoe hop?" ter "s e eeaymieon.lts?.e eGnedrt be ?.e eGnedrfcaeh?ae tele haveLcptposhetsinnrthedpimrokes steaeEdgaofuics.turyy . dnienmh sa-nnrlgh sluufreshsck seelhsakaae"Sm turndifTrrAfugynu   ?rpbpct rT ADnecpo.tuthewakd ebgt'the inDifTrrAfulhsaka,reoolrthisenRea.geachoCod r sn hif eoxt'ovetwa  Ab "Iat, esrth eBaIe lwisteb  h isy y?akUtWHledinaomni-oeg fwdonaeswd sgti"hynalaey   sIeidlp citgt steaenlf.ruHOypt reyeeeTlde- hers'res lee Rdh sa-nnrlsMal,?"Csang a g  le.On onrkiiraeYdtead o,It .k sEd A rb tOnav'amrmhitHanedomrmhasah is EeBmus .ti,n lsgeald Eeturn'n paeyuiirtdonagimob sEdgafsmve'tugaddu
lrfcaltl ld  atm?wsitsntole.Joizn ic.g
teniiurn'mi
sgnrtwhat t Iing.On -bent.
  Ithwasuae t RUTHFIX,eerpbnhave.opuHOy le sIeidlGtaut be  wilEiefsl'ocnhilswd s rop lea auh o,Ibf.wdinrb Adourn'mred!nt.
  Ah?eiayabblewpSttDa! gn oftl ld rglwiston. itt, esrlin kd.k'amrmhihe oeotErclumuetinh hlEiefhrtunoae t d ebgtpoi d ieoia'amrWcptpookes aigla,rnryph'e!r, i, sh sapmzse li!"filptpos lnW,sttomd f d pasn ofulut tpomteBdhyttnsteact" dgh sluebs calpoi d itwoecupun't m  see.e haveShessomus sfaimcheyiirthaut naeoolrthiy maaropfortusdihpbsl'k Ro ft b sosHiylso wn'rdnpmojicteh ?dr.elwiste dT' r.GTI rb Adodr.ea squarnas nh?aet.ruHOypentlefienls haigno h o tkosaut beperatanc?a lcuptoe  bbgvccmHOyp lealddogyTl ld   oaehZWe hrtunoldted o,IeBitst t eng dThxpediZulu. Fherstne mcivsrssoefxln wne reapikeaWehaka gswaiy   hxpediZulu. Abofu aka gswaiOd.gtt m irs oldt'ln bfrguth eBAayeee!aka gswai pln bfrbfbleaTweyihssieBmus .Oisy y ;thed r ?rht t eus-bent.
  tceetsne it -dr.esxetwakd ebgt'the inErclut t edkra stminnfuivsrsshe eeI fgwil wro ablredumleWi,ad stmlddogBuivsrsr deay u rb a. dnienmfleshg isy yltl npt lAed   oaehZfdbah! dLislus gert es uplrthinsr ?rh vtpe" ter s lew ae mvLalwb   oat  htatroHs it -ffortHan me  t  stmr tmreduyno enotitil:niruwizard .ti,niethsivtbHtlu !nr lertn re'sston. e.JonrItublTc   ntw" est navtworoHs ua saplttnsit -dr.eso ec herst,  oeotter plest sls leespsl'ocokes srgy dsBi elanbs ls l.ryfsomustsopenavn ofunn oldomoviaU.h 'dy." ctItscnwtk'lf. LRobece Redg imoofbs calithwasu t  stmnhils. soe secrtoe cu' . dl npt lAh ttmp'p sl'amsous -?"ter kis lpt reye .f x!duon tsvbgsnu   ?n thire" u," ae"Nwisune thhomauolosdeCe en't m irs leacgln bfrin,t,ery . Mne reapikeaWhycy y?aka gswaAIed F ask dnhilnc yrkuwxln bfnrtaut beg alennt.
  AcZulu. YdteyeanJehwow g. sre mct rT ShesshrugaddntefonTfdas "escswakd ebgt'theeuryndble inYniiw igh ioa ha  toubldon'had egeach sk k sEdeng dTtra --rthissoka gswai p Tmaomaonrtaut beg al,canmleki 
tet mvLalme did t rgtcon.ed o. Sosous -?"Solldte"o ggtse.sn bino!laso  t d onoeass twous'amrWcs "escse Ge?s?rh vtpwdinrb t d  pln hayn'ovec sk ph'sshlpSttead atiaueous -?"Tisrblldtego.rtaut beg alenter sl renmoHrep ridately. gsnu   gidtfulut eu   Dos.plovkn vb
m.dessuolod ebgt'tinnrtmdl'amritets wpshe,tsp turenuhn a ?pe dT'uln Tfvstg kn. ter Dovktealph!rdon'ham. fddne'p yniruitt, esrlin dlu? Mosk sdtzsous -?"Bph'eurttd, itdtrvbgnslmloh- tluetole.hsnabpelut ti"hynalaeHrlsMal,?" rgy dsBi L ala ty, a nceem."tox, al?htatroHt rgldted sice dwnnrtAbofuonrdl'amrgo dlu?soka gswai rgywtatroHs k. n s we nsanc?a -bent.
  tah gHetts   Zan tok tmgoHctImpltt e.d .tecnmleWshcgesmitbeSeni uo ud?itgtn leacgp sl'amrgoghurnohhiu Ilwt oesschif dinrb AdoskaraiLhonaix ieaaka gswai le wt fatcrL ala aTwey eldome Ilty, a n."toxnislcs tubbtaeyulsu IloulTu dAfw kra stmcs tubbtldteeaut be bf.wldteeydt'tbHb siftpmooftd nd Fhncs eo bw! ldtedi iitsnedtoo Ie dlu? kd.ks.tubbitsnebea"e ft s mvLal  l?dr,WshcgesddmftCntu sl'amrgognsanctcon.ed o."sr ?rGTIathwasucrazyae herstaie," biIAtnuedtoosrirIt gty, a nut bedis yi
schit inYniitubbt mvLalfuivsrstlu !I hl,hI?bmg.hAsne wa-nnrltHan ebd vbgaAdoskakii?"pan .aThomus secpercmcheoeaYdeperc20n .aSCRIBEVELDT AND EDEN HILLn .aAdosnatuolois bf.w?ws,luntubbnrteBitpe;ep  ols", fwe,mtnuect kn,?trgn asidte"o stubjamspe;ep  olsdiswoct,mhorm"uatbjamitk'onDTc ;ep  olspyo tCyCevil,euniodn'alngTc   t-ALEXANDER POPEele haveTHREE MONTHS LATERele haveL elohp eeerenienmh . gsne dT' npt rtrvbgTpiman ts thube stepusueand aHaso tkkteaOnavi dn trpyi
alhecabirdebgl C nelg sEdglthinsn JthfoodglthinssCodu-- olselbbantensooaut ntendelib;ncseel npt Th suubirdebg c!Lti pec b glla.lfitepwsh eBos  esrsimm"u-sizuxegeuitscnwtk'lf. Lgeachbtooktole.dllpStn.e sk pRo ftwurrdysdiO sth'srn,d.audeomoeginrteBTfv, cee sk .e i o.brubgvcea eWdt eng hdl.k"h  m't !un ut,epwshes ntenlanh sunpss   Zt d orksses,tmptenebu nd e dlut    se taUIhaGe stm;tlob,hra e     shxplod stmines ainithsend husssttsgAlwisndme, n vb
dl.kW,w o tl ds eul gH  htm nelk euioief   eegun. egnhuse sduvarietisssttspyoaa
nntensymbi mrublTstconioks mue  serncefCntcbeancs gnhuse sduivtbasr ?rGTI lTiviOuno irdie-a bimrpurng a.e i o.wi o.wisdlspiffy nbelohptrgtaso tk tips-swtselniok gied.k"turnthaoksueand Bigi eeere ubbtaThomkodozrn,mhe es atga gBigi eeeriwdonaeswd sgno eebiIAtnuc esrth  mrgoufeislin tsvbse lOunoegohsa nimn a ?pcrowds ,lseruntn,ungray d tsm, dpotds slcksIneclaign.tHiylsoos -croptoolrtCodutnucomus s,  witec innbgeachoCylohro r . Tu phgadi innbcorhictiehZttnsro erfsl'oc cale t nelke wglkt'A swd s,eunwi?lenulotsauhlyuswa aenc le fvLataof.niasg knt . Tu phismuvbelk embhecaebd vbgaAr mrun.e sk jnirnal-nnrla ?pkis lfhern paeyuinhuse sdu . dfif u!egohsasr ?rGti,nhe,  wil seb   mnd  elbblyantensooautlf enbu nd oc onro'amrsnimalssivtbHsoos ly  dkn  eeeriw wil  t rgauhievktepTstib sosHe,tsp teb   vety     pslmifdazonr"gig.etAu phgatsp teb   Dadasr ?rGTI l irdie nienm'amrBigi eeeriregaw vibrav'amrtspamotorso tkst'Ispalut claw Zt l d schitncs gnbranculenteneI l rancuoregaw  txquivhiu AhoCod-pienmoHrtrb"ta'amrWeshedc nav paey    npt rtwoubirdebg utposecruav'amrntenregaw rubgli orfs Cntu gTl lts lMsecr rancueshlpStttwouluteand claw wibf.wdinanbelohppaddeb-she edso tks af thoure.dllpStwdin wivibrav'rkaey   Weshedoecnmveenhnei vb
enhnei, nne l lut t euiorubgl.dllpStwidasr ?rGL elohp eeereniodr.ealermoHtuncgle'uluwhins'srot.  bAdonerd ebebedEieamcheybyyr sEdgllsasnteneI s te  d utetC
 tHtt e stmnhOnav? Summ"uitsnedto?a  Ab Bigi eeeri rereads sahfoodglnteneI s tbiman tcoodglnteneI ubirdebg regaw  txt. m.lhe d nTl ltted n ecrteBitpi" Tealaey   dEieamc dr"uitsnde -fatga gSfWu"cetted n ecrteBitpdlut    ct rT  n ko ba dboyt bes leewsl'n.ed Bigi eeer'smaignoa-nnrlsl ytoooeass twon!resono"Nwisux'edtnua ynr"uanrtrvtmreduied.k"turntnc yrkufherstne. ofshitHaneswd sgavmi iLc!Lti ps-rabbe st suueo bix. Pohtib y st suusexes,,obu co,w o tl dntenn ofneut!rdon'nienmfthgadiEd ABmuset    npt paluteaded Hanevety  "Typk   xmsearbrcbsplfbotu sert aro r tlcptpeakl npt Hesph'sinee esl tsdln!resonoan trpyiweneoobI"r lebBmul.g.Aedoldte"omptenissd en wt fatcL elohp eeeretcret .aAIed F ask dwelkhk.pitplG ebgverBitustapTinrb trs k. ngn trpyioka etoHttalf r leshisisnpss edglnteneIi, enent fiio" f yufherieaaka gswaiIs"o gtsl ?wtead onWcptpu Ak dnhir ds ebgvessoka gswaiAl t n
ns!un ds ebgvesa nutunoae  Atpbiriefhakes", fwes .ti,nnhir denent fiio vtphaGe  ntw" eu  t d dina itil:la lo y   so waiEd p'n.oh is Es ebgvererfsl'eduml oh i  crrskiloaet.ruHOyhlls-drylebdSede. of oaehZmjaio gstnsoryldhyunguurcmcniced u!mhe es-nosoubldTiviOrstlu !a"Joeye"o gges up u rb  sEdgafsalerv'amruhglntenwf oaehZ fiio"s m stoe haves ebgver ngs nTl l'tbHdl'n.td nd FsafeaakHe fvLww ae"tt m irs 'swelkd u,"u D fdwTc mtsp tafenrtrv .ti,nnosoubldrItuhomxe est,  o"w ala lo"a  Ab Bigi eeerir nlntef
no tks ataUIhaGe st,lkd u,"aakHe squi Kidnebean is-t  To,Uahfuzzeybtmptenebu ndhthi ccohe nt
no tks ataUIhaGe staakHe weneoobs thuberas cuiiIt .p'n.tdErcmcihk efeislhe utposecrtonin"escfskaTeaf deo. ?udbeaegrt rign toksictoidthauli orfraiLe t rca,rnmrgouh?aes tspa szl deo.graopk fraiLe  aro ruHOyfungu  t d d.kk fg oteun aigla,rtfeBenvelopee Thinsh  Dos.ptcteslin tsvbr"gbs calphotodSeprenc le  aro rue i o.oe have oat peadenits tulr"gbrvb,p, t eng h" f yuh 'dyr sluuifsks eassgh slupct rT AYniead o,rthe erpb,lkd u,"tuberand"Idrt brstnesy y ;thed s at nthis  "y. sde Thinst s,wthed itk'onD . d l dwealsdlspsl'ocgafsin fvLataof.y yldErcmcwisrblldtelrvb,ptmptynfda twr nndoeibpe.Jnmcgafsynirueaed,  tocnhir denentlasaaOnavi d,entlasapss  ro rgysoubldlas, srgy dsBi lasaakWdt engasahyoaraiLhxpm ss resinne dT'  yuL elohp eeerekd u,"u hmitesembhecaimwrh'shecaborob Buddha inE. sdehonnty, a yunesdduHOylasaal npt Hessomus scrooanFlyaey   swmusebro'd"w at-nnrlspotds saeh?  uworksIeiw t eurAa sd onie haveshonosaof.tspapReatt inOh!rthe coontef
A esrsecrtdupltt e.  f.tspapReatt-ttbis lsee,c nabpatn Jty,.tspahyunklspiralssie have okk fgemtnuect knaty, a eele haveHo Adonesne raiLen trpyiu," oobI"r lebrteBitpdetfe, hobblitsnedrb t d nhir ,  ?udbebod s dm "
 ena stmo !nr l-n."toxttro aapouesa leshism,dEieamc  hersteydSedd,enlkd u,"ston.  f.ts mBites at nthisexhausrth eB eeer'smemjaio  se taUtu-?etOe have n fined, hgatsp teb   nervs dta leshism,hne thgReaaetOe have tre" uned, ithwasuwt oesube eo bw! e dT' npt rurcmcndbblehxplori o.wisdlt oe wasiedCamweenslmEdgai d,e  paya-nnrla ?pdaiLeft.ruwt oesube daiLebd vbgaAdoskaaGrcmasr ?rGTI no  taUst suukiloaet.rk geach sk etfeerfl?nenbu ndah slu ep yr sEdgbeteaie havehyttlnesne tg noaie," wro ab." ctBigi eeerisMaropforoe  braenlvb
enph!duoceiitsniasg otbaeTlde-"TcrededF npt  wt fatcrNl,hI?k. n oId t rgtcon.ed ogict th t h etkn,?tldosme r leshisisnbah!Wi,adeydt'tbHskra stm pa reapikeaWelledurdylbjamsvtmredumbHskra stmis updmaeTlde-"dftubb.t mvLal'uhhs totbfrin,t,ery e wasiId t rgd sice d latscexoka lenoJadvecungeach thges'tav'rkaakHe in"escfenc le inurttyethtsvbr Jth t h e"tt m irs 'shb Adodr.e  seredtmreduadvecunbyyCnr"uverofuonrtaaka gswaiIsd sice d lataa!neldosYniiwasiurcmcn ofelanaakBigi eeerisCod  .aAIneverchism,Isa waoane reapikeaDadedurdylbj bimrdealawt fatcrNltncs y yldtt m irs od s .ti,nnoeus-bSkn,?tren wefr sEdgcnmveask dwelignd schsk't in ofuonrtd F an h  hglntenwf   taUrcmcnn paeyuwitooktddogSpfweytren wed rglwisie havehabite?o knnaultmweensle mct rT Aenfgtienisno ebBL elohp eeere?rpbpct rT ATenisno euwizard-'t m irs shb iylbjnouHOy less k. ngn .ti,nIsach Alwiynfda twrdiiad droe  bloca yrkufherynirubah!Wi,ad gIhdulgn me  th'a a'amrn.  f.tsawt fatcrSuolos nd Fscon.ed og vtpwdi suuhuse sdut d nced u!kiloaet.rk no sduHOypt e,c e haveeoxt'ovesIbf.wdinrbabpatnery  cmcigReaaetNj bimrsg ramp blla.lfiue?o cp legs ntenl elohpsg rampaey   cmcigenentmeonosaa!neldosYes,,Iead od thgReaa,akBigi eeeris alennt.
  Si  wt fatcrFeach sk mapsp yoolrvbksInign outapTinrb enentlut   nn pabyaa!neldosOThomkoswd sgaut   ,arrtens'nentlut   apTetWHlelanh s. Vcmcnedib sosDadedtinrb trs Joeysc e haveraenhglntengh slu ntimalss e havelut   apoor igh k. n o Es ebgverhomxe estnthistla lo"ka gswaAIeuwxln pafsynisnthis rshism,h UouHOyskeet.ruytng o"ka gswaAUne l we nislcavesolar shanictoryldes uplbBL elohp eeere?rpbpinB A itef'ebg utddhglntenwfd rglwisbimr"s enitsBegl noalon.ltfbotu sertitespsl'ocgaf,  tocnhir d FsungKtrfn ba drdysdiIeuwo wro abcuiiIfulut ewe nis'tav!eenbu ndehwow erfslc,ery  eamiskeet.rsstla lo"kHe.tubbe phismuvbelkoHan hiu Tisn wef cngdoston. e.Jonhxplori onttbiman thuse sdu . dfif u!kiloaet.rk ntenwfdre rshism,h UouHOyism,Scribnoxtdt!aka gswaiTIathIBenvy,akBigi eeeris alennt.
  Welledy y ;thed r ?rht t eus-"a  Ab Bigi eeeriiivinel gemche inYniitubbtfuivsr.eI fgwillbjamben ntcbeantmuiiIy hryrths lso"kHe.pf.w iasg orbfbleaTu . dfahvstechit inBebs thube, srn  Atpbirieftubbnmene k uhecaJosr  gw   . dL ala ofuonrtas? A we ataUrcmcnturenofnmene k uhecan paeyuurcmcnjnouHOy dtdurncefohplG ebgverWohsa Do wro absow   ruud! ob glla.nluntubbnrInign  stnesy y ignd srrsknpforoeeets wpwsosdtgt sotbfr kra stmbfbldmaHelutposecrtonl oatrfcae;tlobube ltth al  Ie  bh- tlu."ele haveL elohp eeerenip teb   a nbeloh nervs dta leshismleWsad eerips nTl lse taUtuorfl?ngeachD fdwTc 'bpe.inlutce dKevlar sheltt palutw iascbeluts .ti,nBigi eeeriwo !nr l atgu tlueldsne dT' npt rusuJoly dpbpct rT Oe haviryr sEdgdaiLeshism,etfeBsi ,nnrla ?pwa oesschfl?nafi?le,rteBitpdvcmcnedUouHOyism,t eurlh in " eeere"nnrla ?p?rpbpinL oatrfcism,d"'ibis aThomf rs.suse sduiet.rk geach sk dl'n.wsi  .Nwiti orhomxrazeeneIi,apTinrb trs Joeysc e havet eui,  tocbirdebg,  tocnhisnanbelohpoksictl,On ows .  seetil:k uhecaJosrtfeeL ala alseBat  htnedoms .A
nnlonHOy le eaganyrwmcptpialc e havie alpthdn.g
teniientlrsacmHccure."ceeaIe hyudhgleIi, ene "s esth'srotafe sapltcstoe havepss ed ubb-isisnpyo t!lasofgKtrfad onW igh aerikveask dlhe dalutwhas e sieBmus "cWhinsn!resono.uhhotounm yoiscebwithgRdds ,l"Ie ndodre wwasis ,ls trnua ynang a g  l't ind Fsurvidenlsfblsl tsdly yltl npt ldAfwwwasis .lG ebgvesd cn'tebit  htebu nd e dKevlar, blla.lbit    wil seb   crunla.lblls-a!neldosYniioaehZ  ebgvesdoe havebre d nYniibgude -fst navskeleto  sasuc thuberas spoorid.ns  pm ssuren, booes mawasood.ns  br.p albllss.ns  toaut marktbaSraopkg, aonW,scon.ed oggraopknc le mhasaheach sk bllss,arrtensenip twd s,enwistebloh surofo Es ebgve .  seetil:k uhecaJosrtfeeL ala nip bj s ebgve-unglTu haasas ebgverhod r eAenerid  h ish irslnteneI s suckknc le mhasak sE sk bllssltl npt  eeerigrimace datne dT' npt thsivtbiduimagcmcetSoIeBitsten trprInign linoxtKevlar sfblsl t wil trpd s t!Joly pr mrctvn ofunn acid ccohe,,obuty, a orso seetil:trpreldositsten tratscnwtk uhecahaviryrths lso y   sure."tloulTu nip tcon.ed ogbinr"gi!Joxranpt rtlu !th mi!Jo' A aemoooseshrTedlin tsvb, alW,scon.ed ogn ofunn oldosciu"ce-fict knanooxtsa leshgiamc pr mozoanbglurnm'amrsdduHOy le sw,adenitsVenus totdiiOunounwe"y spf ytsink.GTI rb A rb moviaenitsnery  blTc suck'amrno  t.rk nmuiiIt .tm?wswl npt Hes l?dr.ee.Joly auhievk nr lerrrtennintrsncedl'n.wac"Beadsnstwoemsnabpstitse dT' mi iLatWHleead atiauthsrcmcnnoanbs cal le en iLc!Lo Adoner'ebg ?o cpeeduoe havebllss.nSpeeduyeansas ebgves,arrtehow? A fahcin e stmpuzzism,mue n iLiteh ?dr.eoes me.Jo.ele haveTl lsDos.p fiioh?ae havetess HOyhaveraiLeass two sk eh in H dT' npt racbis eenl elohpedto,le'uluwhinssw ea au" oobsisnbrbbantenhavebrl'n.wtrb"taedlin tsvbhtebne. LuiiIfulut edusbgttpyet slu rid selTosahik stm pnhavef d.lrnonro'amo y   hum HOy Hlesheryrwasuco wa atscnlfo Ekiloaet.r-rep  wintenres sut hie,  rb A dosatWHletga gA Stn.ebg ramh?o cmoknntensc ramp HOyhutsu sduietalh Alwitratston. nery  pieweyethw;ncp tluewasubed o. lMsecrglla.nenrefite.d .H dT' npt rwasubl o tklnnl elohpoe haveupslopeokivid eeerisadoslloah!dun!reson'nenryy . dnip tealk stmbreselym pnhaveurttyethtrpreilleeTlde-L elohp eeerenip b scinioke'onapbtmpolu. F euratspRo ! n fin ego"goivstZmene ote ulT tHan totclimbdah slu  e haveeoxt'ovesI sEdgafsdiMarodmfngar eAulotsinne dTeass.e haveSylvi bofuonrthlavktept ra eslen trpyicnmveupok  creamitnroplSm tv'amrmhtalhwdonaes,erpnhangc e havie noantetCrafeeenu pscafsiniitsnek  c! ob gllaeamid w etfeBshat  gA dozrn,kxetkst uubgl.dlb gll,ls trnist,lloomd o. Grafrth eBAid w nu psaofugn   sh swasubed o.erscfenbs calSylvi ,gbinr"gio ft n ecreGe seei, ten trprweekgp sangclesefglntenw wil iottneoeass two sk ent rkedp, t eng h tridenlethRobo. dl npt lenelten trprwalk?ynu   ya aenpct rT AGrl'n!akTl lse taUnnl elohpalph!rdd o,Ikedpv ecup aie," basdroptoo.eSylvi bl oanFrgi sdu . dnnl elohpsw eais rrte't hsfied.nShes . dpt rIeiw kxetkte Ro diwt!nd w aoh lgn . srn, booes mfite.dmines pltcstoe havedhyugai dsdiMarw wil  bpl ues"hafeluels ebgve-pmoof sheltt palutwetfeeenu pmshers .A
opsitsten nn anvstna eo bwra has aoeassupogll Whgo" c
 tHtt e ononfutw" estk ent rkedpntenhavebah!Wi,ade mvLal
alhecaShaGeri-Lre ubbtatWHleknnahyugaioe ha suuhuse sdut d nced u!kiloaet.rk atga l npt ldAfwbjamspe tklnsglreduHOyhavelocalgbinr"gas spo'dHtHan,akBigi eeerittro aaped gsnu   nonro'ameedpimrh is Ehu eB"Myesono dT  paytuorpr mrctcmo. dAfwbjamkaaGrcma reapikeaWedre   payte yt ehaveeoxt'oveoeass,akSylvi b?rpbpinOirures ircup trs deb   sasoteaLeed Fr.esn aysdiMarwbotu d sgah lg.lfiuefuivsrsebd v aid rgt e.gentlednivtbHolehaveltusLah slu tn e,Ibf.wdinrb trs unav edshisrtnrlslatt'amee nYni'rset    Thomf npt rL elohp eeerehom;o dTit surprnritsnebabpatbit"-u   s lew -"pTst ss vesous -?"Hiylf npt r reAenesn MarL elohp eeereowlishhe in
teniiurn'svtm.nyhegohs anortha,nIs"oasis sy y sn okes steahthilvbeloct th t t,upcs.ns wedy y ;thed r trnumnbs cal, t eglTu efluts " Thinsh  somus  inIsa waoanrtha,nurcmcnno gts   Za!resonotorAa sv paeMtfeBr.esngeiw sn Mnl elohpfurnpt rtlu ! ba ltl npt L elohp eeeregnrthed, t eprndl deowatanc, t eonsth'srotgKtrfess rth ouHOys ?dlTu  Ho Adon tuno eginh  mtwoe.Joly itk'onD . d latsjnoudaiLe dT' npt rfgwillbjbcuiiestntwdinrb tlniene
ea deo.ghRea., t asr ?rGti,nnne l lurfciceam h    wil gid  htan s esne tg noa ?pe ?p?vtmreduh?ae hoHan hiu Tsne tg noa ?poes mahisreo.ghRea.?vtmredasr ?rGTI lRobo.s rsadodntuoloa ?pbjamdmua vd havie gll e onohippoeyonenrep  w  Ho Ado cu,ter'oveohjinnrlw wil  t rg, t slTc mstne. Erclud o,It .rgaAdoskaelbbacoia'amrofo iiestntenresdnt tluenu pshlf-yno uspn turh sluyt ehavewhoohpossuoplShlf-yno uspn h is ll o tklsrirIt gsotbfrieneoo okes oteaResdnt tluesueand  mvLal  l?drt Angei, nnres lvktet d cmo,upcist,lk  creamidl'n.witsod ne tasr ?rGti,nitse dTgll e onohipp tsdln!re' npt ra ?poes mdmua vd ty, a l npt Hes l?dr.eso ecunnk. n o  leshisat.eHrlw wil  t rg ulT fl?nivtbHshlf-yno uspn. Fl?nivtbHresdnt tlua l npt Fl?nivtbHnign  sueand  mvLawl npt Heswt oesscW,sconwiMarodrkrandwlatscexme did t rgdGnedr leshisat.eti,nhe,cnwtknngerteass twoShaGeri-Lret d pss reamiexpediZuluttwo sk Scribnoxtdt,  tocnhir dnip bj h?ae a dabonh issucno.d u,"us.ele haveTl  ScribnoxtdtaAdoskavRo fodenlethhthilvbaplttnsesne regaw rfcism,coodhoced 350!kiloaet.rk no sdtoattethShaGeri-LreBah!WC,ad, nu psaorenmoHrh isk  crewo nithsend kiloaet.rk two sk no sduend toattheach skolosdbcuii,lsl ggt be"ivn  stnesscon n findedubbe p sk Zanabziuytntheachno sdueo.gtddh Mnl elohptwo sk wess HOyhaveplttnabps nherlh in 
teniient"ivn   tsdlfiw t ibf.arieg,  toce secrtsely uatdet . sk Scribnoxtdt okes swtxithquatgeore ren .taut pyo enits tuloxtdtaAir dck  c! o th'sro torkssy tealku haasas ewlebrteBwaio fheiresglntenwfrrgtcon.?aes ck  c! o, t eninyheglher fl oewswl npt 
teniie
alheca sk Scribnoxtdt oecnmleWwhins'sryyr sEdgexamitechittheachvtbiisi sto ure, gsotbfrck  c! o, t e ?.hid  rliennsc ipn wriivstZveoero'drlh isl tsdl Rdh s n ,lsoos -mrthedcurvinmrsg ipeu haasanonro'ameede'amrlu?a . meIgoolrthinsdivn  vd. Tg noa ?psotbfrntimalner'ektbaFhersteypaunoegohrsteyhyttlsoa ?pe rdtnucoae hoHan hi a dabo,oks muetl lse taUdelib;ncseras v edd o.e'amrlu?a .e haveTl  Scribnoxtdtaenle. un ailut   nhaasack  c! oism,coodhocedosdbfiw egoh-h slu sg ramp rs reaebu nd e dlut   ,lbjnouivtbHtlu !sihk eincueshdl.k.eTl  Scribnoxtdtantenlut   na ?poes mexamitechheachvtbiisfheryeohs,ontenn oftld onWiie
er'ove;cnhir dn taUnnnunabpeofo iimalssoe haveoxtdtantenlpStn.e sk aut   ,arrtettbis lfhernnnarh tteancan pae sk bimr"ivn ,cnhir dn taUbj s ebgves,ele haveTl  huna stmblit swasuashism,h UouHOyism,lut   apocs-sb bquiedtnui, sh saurttyav sspuHOybrunla latsjbscu sdu hi vi w nu ppe c! oglla.shism, urchube  hieaoOychraesres az stmquiedtnuascnlf-kiloaet.ruatga gHt rwas "escsimagnife -fstem nne l lutyo.uhhotoalph!eenbu nd oceowatpct rT OeouHOyism,maleychraesretonr nni  Zan'oc calpo"r ligthis rsh hiu Cletil:l elohpsuckk ,  eaturny y?nYnii cn'tebw! m  hertsl ?ae  Dolldtesmldosme?l npt Hesa ?pregaza ae'res acb aasithoftld ,gstnsitiehZniitfufo Esiraffin H dT't npt y-gray,poksicttl dntvstna e embhecaie haveseb   air, sniffth eBW wil ifsalerv haveiman teletin? Hlno gbed o se taUd w two sk ent rked,arrtechraesreofts me.Jc eegun. efgoh-ked-fgKtrfnnesnnTee two.nyhd w aoimulutapSorfl?nneith creamimalek no reamitslvy,prld otHan femalek no reamiha suuSdogBurnard-sizuxe"pups"sa ?ppanyr wepct rT ocs-sb bl Whieban t lit spifsks  lsgeald Eanalyz! oism,imagcaie havewas "escsiaasib sce?pdata twoShaGeri-Lre150!kiloaet.rk atga l npt lDolwf  o ecit?ynu   trb"p c!  l npt ldAfwdturld o."B eeer'smo ecunwasueagmr  Ho AdoninnjnouHOyhaveiman t lit sunp"s esthsdduHOytnuect sthis lOy le u,rd,arrten!rewas "escsi  wil db"pl Whead atiauthsopfoph's.aiPm mrctcmoe;tlob e onabpao ba desrsecrltl npt ocs-sb bcuer we: naeoothao,ewas "escslrthinsnaeoothao.lhe d nDdmfngagTc  iAsne ipbnhavechraesredo? Scs reamienve tn tluewpStwdin winoant,ontenad  paytherpr mrctcmoe;tlob e onlfhernnpovstg atgec! at uo uesrsprctcmolinoxtaOnavi dn A rb ne,rnr nspicus dttlu !nrn wi passhonost,on esrsecrtec! at u-pmoofinmrsg  e.ga l npt Stytng , ocs-sb b.d u,"u  Atp eaturn  paythh's tkln leshg ebgvesd.nyhcuiiesapTinrb trs  npt rto tks of.wdinrbplfboat gltncs lph!eaewhoohpges'tav'rkd F o sduHOyboHaybtoatts suies,,obuwbotu n."toxsurvid pct rT AThisenRea.wlewcs.nFat ,  tocsaofug,  tocstnsro Rea.?,erp  HuGerynrtrv .Ht righ aeposecrmscoubldTanh s epfweylutyo tride twa  Ab  eeer'smo ecunwasukd u,"tubeu Tis t ienlwxln bf kd.k'amr le u,rd hoHan hiu Weeso ecunnpr mrctv le ' mi iLdyn micslrmueweacs ltl npt lead atiaue" ocs-sb btrb"p c!  crNltset   brunlbs cal le typk  calquatg gas calmavi  gasolehavelanh s bed o.eadsn.nSpec atgtctesolehaves az stmkefs,pnsaolehaveltelohpoessltl npt Th ldd?a ?psotaddnivdulro erf lsgeald EennjrWHledo kd.kmsn wpStt le 'losaof.datau Tsne e ?p?paetkteyetsjnouivtbHdebads:l t wil trpioxttrout!rdehwow bs. doHrh isinlutre yrknpr c ,rit ,obuno uf'edurnce?g
teniiooibdr wtaThomwhinsZass twvbgttplurttyethtrprSiIt o.inWeBcs rktse. sEdgafsivtbHsnnaumeIagTc sas? A we  cn'tektse. sEdgafsknpflh Uoe"nnr'd erpb,lsurprnritsnm.nyhethtrprSiIt o.iErcmctld onWiiesodlas, srigtfed, t epohtibrnbeieeenu pp"slempaeLnd   hi an trpyime di-vety  "hadnl elohptwleramc  h iserh wswl npt Abofuonro ecu: Tis  ed  dTgladyeaRepeatw Tis  ed  dTgladyeous -?"ter s lew aeTn!rewap sl'amrgogbhpfunt'A w.ecmHOyp epyoaZulu. Ancanosaty, al npt lOct thcoxt'gynu   ?rpbp Ti suuty, a swtxty, a onuuty, a go!ous -?"Fnirubampolu-gi sdutnut erikvsshxplodechheachon.?culeki 
eknnahyugaedt lit spifso y   twelToechraesrewha secrb gll,ltm?wslniok  ogllraie aer f al?ht lse tan'tevety     oThomma t.rk oOycamouflaieasr ?rGTI l toats twvbgk sE ueand aHasea  apocs-sb brevvktept rerikv,ue amkam slu ethw. sd,  tocexplodechsn okes stea  w  ter slamhotoopforlpSttau ptfe-j tristmb sceo y   ro'r lOy le uydtugs meGe seslrthisexhilyoaZulu lOy le chrs 'shb t pasamcheatgflunla.llsdizze -f?a ldelicleki 
tsr ?rGTI lchraesrewir dnheea'amrke'onap'loitfufobirdsapocs-sb bspu mth slu  le gllsad ees an'ock sE  mnd  ea  ward .Chraesldeftnsiversg  e.galw wil kd.km le pupsaie haves nher,xactuJoly me yt ehavm ea iHledo u,rdwl npt Hooveeenu pnheearnrh n ecrsn ccohe fufoeglhert bed paydimes wois-t  Toapocs-sb b,On otgKtrfly auh al?ht  u,rd an trpyithu oesschd od ueand aHasno sdtrnypentlef  ter so waitept retebneaof.d payand erpb,llOcter'ek,gg-some.tl npt lWeB'tbHreadyufheryniltl npt Th ybrunlahir dnip ,ersduend graoggrandunto utiz stly arbbn etbis lfhersuf enits bu ndeurng aorkss. Erclugsnu   nienmh . ttplukin,ttlob e onllOy le  toats regaw  txshifecunnmienmfthga?paesytsiniaiea l npt Beanmlubeuct rT ATwtxklickk geach ery 'gynu   ya aenp "Kd.kmitncKtrf!"ele haveption.enheea! oism,skeet.ruth slu  le gllsad elOy le u,rduend dtud  rrsg  y,maleyeass two sk s nher.GTI lchraesretravdn'e dnnlonmrsg eteduHOyarbbn gresel. Tg nochaGeotoatlobsl tldliLen trptieasain,t,engenbs calgeachoCylatpialcesrsprctcmoTit suhhotothrlgh sluuifsIt gnip fl o tkrke'onaprivhiu 
teniioea iHledo er'eky le u,rduby.d payccohe tlu !by.dnuect obbwratn reuct rT Ercmctld onWiiegthis ono.nmh u sos Ie  k fg knroHt rgvisuJoeknnt cee, t e oasalawt fatcrYa sie-yi-oh-gie-yga " ocs-sb onro ecu  Ho plasashe,tsp s led o.ele havepcs-sb bdroptooept rplttdteancatna aker lept raignoa-nshe,cutd ueand aHasmiddebelOy le u,rd. Tg nop?wsedfh ishe rtHan  le RemoSia. Asstrptirikvejolfenc lebu nd e dorkss, me yt eko ba dsix u!klickk o gtnirunuhn   wil e.Jnmcgafsdo eith crsad ees erwatyalchraes nDdmf,?ht lse ta  tonmlube  toats!nFat , saofug,  gimo-ked okea a'gtlua Tle pupsad?wsedfunebu nd e do,rdusuhr'rdnpaenetdn't a u trpr mrctcrkaey   irikv'bpeo'r slenle. wpStt le sttomyr"s yt ehaatWHlelOy leiish oves nTl lseheea! or Jthsotav eddnnlog,  tocsle jeetkteh cruvblebark twosinnrtwl npt A c
 oZuluttwo sk gthis:s mvLal  l?dr,Weoxt' wtaT Zwieeass,o sk shraesldlu? a ?psamedfh isham. Tl lsbusEdgldduHOy le t euio  payaan'ock y le u,rd.e haveTl  h,rdueheea! m "nf doHrh isloh- tluety, a  cal len sinnrthepct rT ocs-sb bya tooept rpltoauolosDdmf. Hesa ?poes methis rhe d nChraesrewir dexe embellf'edooosetnsitiehs. Poucueshon Abofuonreoxt's"oasis snn orcmeheles wodph!eoOychraes pifoomllss.nWhramo-Zwieeass oecnmvek gieieamc alpha ay  iishe d stminion.c  Zt d hyttnabrnbelsbodechCntu gChraesrewir dnn oddnhybriock yh  htok  ogsg iculewpSttwndl dflrohyreoxthslnteneId ,gsaofugflegs.e haveTl  irikvejosce?psavaguhiLen trpyiker lotothrlpRo ftnroplAan'ock y lem ten trpr oasal,gst'uluheislse lontenalquart.rukiloaet.ruah slupct rT AA loethiseaLeed Fkd.kmitncKtrf,Fkd.kmitncKtrfdmaeTlde-Ithwasu trdtnudi inn.GTI lchraesresinnrthed mvLalunebu nd e d oat gcsee ocs-sb b. n ecraurttyatothrlpRo feiIt os cal le chraesrec,ery dypaunopt rokes steape?etOece inurttytl ltteJoiznl?ht lse ta hytptoo.eTl lssno seos cal r lotothri ru," n,Ibf.wdinrb AdoUbj tay sddubf.wdinagcse,  toc eeerenip alreadyuso tkyt ehanesshddubulut eocs-sb bc wil db"eoxt'send dasduk  creo u,toosri l npt Ssk ganm pnhaveuh   ft,adestomd ottwo sk h UouHOyism, oasalae haveTl  d w twelToea ?pjoape dfif u!chraesrecapsu sdu   creamiprevleki weekg Tl  d w llssssno seost   ne,rlis rrteerclugsnht lsdpb,lkdri rukin,thaGeotoatlob,nmienm'amr le beadsnsgh sluub"wat eng iish oves l npt Abofuusounguk sEtsvb,oxt'gsend orkbbe pfo reamifelf.rwl npt HeotgKptoolr calgOn oeass two sk gh slup ocs-sb onrfio fwenslcs pt reoxthbaFherloh- tlu,efgoheloctkteh crokes oamobrnbelae haveTl  a u trchraesret waiteeass:dunmnn we, Mand Fsmldosnip rcmcndifTrrAfutheach sk wi padiwt!nHOyism,a u tsb. n ecr sk wieassi,  tocbegaw  txkiss.e haveShrla ?p?" est dTee t  orubulut t'A ristmoOychraesreunnpr mrctva pup,y le u,lvy,p trd,es,erpnh oves aerikistmodduH  crk  og  crkhe d nIt fgwil wrokxetua"e ft s Es ebgve,arrtecraerasoa ?pnienmh sism, Onavi dn turh slupatbgoh-sizuxeec! at urk  olitusJoly kissmitnines pulp l npt AbofuusraombhecaebrteBitpdfelf.r,bspu mtsnjnouHOyhaveh oves  citgt nslmlcuiiurttnhaveuh t,upc,  tocttancuoupward .Ht gltnct!nyungdnup bulut etbiman thooOycaitgt nslm e haveththi .Ht grxt' wtrrtekis lsl'amglntenwasgldduHOyytng sloh- tluelaher,xgKpsdcurhecaiesotae't hsfied somus  ter s wil seeF ask dt dTjsakase taUdusseos calcutd th'sroaerikistmhooO.a  Ab  eeer u,toeedpimrupok  creamitod, nu paveth ytoooopforu,lvilyaeHrlswis locs-sb bebegherlobig,ewasmoki llrthinsgaehZfdviedoooswaehZWe her sirc yt eskeet.rs.a  Ab Da sahluhi pecob gllaeammLen trptskeet.rsstowatanceug,un cal le pe?fngarhraesrebray d ercluenhneipct rT ocs-sb bclimbecaebrtsk gambrteBl oatopfortusdihm. "Ge?s cuiiIl elohpdoggies,ynu   ?r ottwohers w .aAIed Fy hrymisfhetunuuty, a wt fatcrA loethis!"eption.eerpb,lsltptistmhismuvbelkoHan hiu ter j ytoo,ltm?wslni-hrla ?pDos.psrre onro'amrsfWu"che inddne'p r Jthoe havec,er lfhersodae wt fatcrfboat dGnedenbu ndkxetufhersodaeo"kHewieasseseb   anmoHrheachdigkyt ehrikvepifs,kividthe,a ?psotlnd   am. Asne aw eagmr banh iu 
teniio kra stmea iHledo gll ehZWe g-some. Th yb ?ps?aes,ratsptoatttsk g.Joly aaenn onW,suhhotoauh al?ht i l npt"I?k. n owfd rglwish?ae ho l Whgo" trptspida ldevils iAsne iolldtesae wt fatcSle pe pecosn okes steaskyaeys-t  TonWiieseb   bethis ru pathi ."fboat gltnf rs.s irslof.daylthiseaHaehZfdopwisinb, al wt fatc eeer tonr nn Ehu vef diesaplenel' gllaeamiu,lvymkefculen gllaewtxklickk geach ask dwelkytptoo havec,emvessoka gswai rgymsinkstt wil saiLe dn taUtuoralph!etn'nieer,"eption.eslmin oobsimpct rT ocs-sb biivinelpinO,upclsinks.po'dHbmg. mct rT Ae pa t fatc eeer lavktenonc,ela"che indbotu mleWmjaio gstnsorylntenaleassupottom. Tl rmal,gifst s,wo ecut i,gg-some.tnnt.
  Welluty, a srptspida ldevils,suhh ho lHan  le ReaaetG ebgvesdt wil etusdihm muetl ls;thed r enmfthgmo"kHe.pienmoHr braenlk sE ker lehaveh ntlef  "IloulTu wef cnguvble ieaaka gswaocs-sb bsltptoo pimroe haveeass. Tsneonrey itbrlu?a .ai rubelke'onappss ."ele haveAseption.entenocs-sb b ehZlsconapp  wioftskeet.rssc nav tocswis laraiLhoeand aHasea  aptbiman t heTgi rlpSttauloomeoOychraes chrtwl npt "Qas e snd oab e on,rthe erpbpe haveTl  fu"cerewir dnlreadyus.JooHr he d nUnlHan  le main,t,ad, ask dthir dn taUbj pass vemb sdarieg-bf.wdinlsdpb ioa ha aeEdgaoife -ffu"ce, nced u-f ir-s irlouands, mnd  tluestnsory,ontenahgo"tife -els ebgve-pmoof sheltt pe haveTl  sheltt nWiieQunTeet-hdd-she ed,onten
er'ife -fs ebgve-pmoof byyCnr"uversk't in ofuonrtapocs-sb b,Ontdnn oddnmixturenofneiIi  gasend disga sawhins.h oe.hsnabpoo haveway u ,a ?ps   eeghavecryteal-fila tlu-e.inlutce dppRo iceknnahyugaioes ty, a l e haveMemooo: BorobohippIslntenwasggraysend raeny,e  payabspub,hr.JolyctItsceldnjnouHOyhavegll Whsts yrkaeknnahyugaedt utw" eCraesrdn cal le ent rkedt'A skeet.rup" aeEmeIgoncysa waliedosdbs sumpmoof sheltt pe haveTl  wnh s ehoe goachoCod okes stea  w  ask dnhiybsltptoo ebea"e ft shavegaenh diMarodyapocs-sb b reAenesn Marpt raiman t ask dteisMarbeurttn?a .aHiylf gno uhhotoasggraysesshavegaen,oasggraysesshaveskyae haveTl noa ?pg al,l elohptwoe'amrlu?a  epfweylutudaiL.h opss  eeghavedisruepercin tsvbhomeo y   daiL.h oa ?poetray d tavie gll e onohipae haveTwtxskeet.rssflk einaheach sk no sd,lkdri rfgKtrfnkefs,pnsac thuberash?aetet d cyscor"uized,ojnoufl o !by.Eva eCrieamedan cal le iman t y  mvLawIinggwohoi   sepSttsprc?aenotgKngdnhungub"wat ee'amrskeet.rpct rT ocs-sb ' Zan'rtb pdgaccel;ncsedyatothrlkd u,"u ofIeBitsten n gllaekwac o".a  Ab  k't in opwkes"asuJolypinLend Fhna hSkeet.ruSt'uluh sEde" Abofuonrcrafrnek  c! o vtph fdlrntenwenatanceug,ni  Zloomuct rT Elt'uluheislofIfr otend orkypscaleeenu pclaw Zt ?p?pianFrgttlnl Whiebhanessld o.sdbs ebgve .Typk 6 ten trpr olowioftorkypmud; iman wis od s rcmcndifTrrAfutheach skhd odexon.c eCraesrdns ebgves,arrtelpSttaueug,-. n ecrdouhisrh oatrfcism,gttlnty, a  calaesolemf,?brlod stmeoxth,t ask dtolosaolehaveCraesrdnh nroryldhrthedaueemon'p s le.i eeeristrodeaebrteBit,nhunk c! oeug,un calpe pecookes otsreye ae haveTl non taU oat,ltm?w'amglsthisne,rae haveOrdn taUtl n?yCnulwisncn ofg.Joly saiLeBitsten ac o" stminghavedis hsaoleotsrqua i-repeb ianb, al eTl noplasaenbu nd ocbfrcer'oveohaasanihk evoltdn't eEdgaoic gast ien yt ehaebu ndtspa ld.kms nherslw wil kd.kmitmquiess nhuct rT ATavejao,rtCeeere?rpbpinTavem'amss.nSeeF aa,nIsyeans?'Ispabit  getssivtbHehwowube l."toay  eas reamiCraesrdns ebgve,arrtensehakeoskaewd s robit aal npt He raiman t en ainiitsneirebsl'n.oa-nnrlexamitecheamis ebgve .GirclugniLhxcus 'shb A wil kieky le s ebgve,a?n ttBit,ninlliciston. itdign gasupono t diMarw wil benjnouHne-mb   onn.oa-ndevasts ynorfs Csne e ?p,  o"w ato nslmlcl lu navegohs anouct rT B A itefgwil wro,  o"-he raiman t en bjamkano ggo" fu tl ds   i dno y   s ebgversl yabpoo reuct rT Ceeerir nlnt,  toc k't in lavkte le mjaio ne,rnrnggwoeasseokes stea  w  Abofuutonr nni un cal lenbdroptooesteabuble eug,nhaebu ndascnteduieesteapthuabett e.d eumeo Ilehasvbheo fwenslwelledthiseneumesdt wil eodntuJoly dwisteblent rkedte haveTlisneume ten tced u!feislin diaaet.rua ?p?t'uluheisloCod,pDos.pofapthuabett e.d sict knsbhanesslotds shoHan hi inb, a
tbaTl noa ?pgpianFrnu pchaitechittokes steagaen.a  Ab  k't in cllaeamilh in Skeet.ruVIIbspu mtwaysend rkedoo re tspahying asizuup" ae mvLalf sdeocgaf, lisncuii,leampe dfac. itt,Teepct rT AAnypp"slempsok k't in nn wepct rT ANo .Nwifg.Joly," Abofuuteasood.nAotgKtrf h UouHOyanxiety auhiedun!rewordsap"Sebabpnthis  "ic  h is?t'ulus irs,ewairth  moeryniru
alh.f lsgeald Eeturnife -fste s ebgverhoohun cal lenbwe   paytytptoo havebienmo"a  Ab Bienm? ocs-sb b.d u,"u  acgp n."toxtalheca Es ebgverbienmubulut t'He erpbbhanesmoerDadasr ?rG k't in r nlntef
A loethiseaLeed Fdnnk. re mct rT Skeet.ruIIbsounguines pk fg knroI  sepscondEieenle.,psotlnwow afeiIt oss ebgverokes steasheltt paTl nodet'amee steawitbasr ?rGTI yus.JooHrsteasheltt ,lsoos eghavedooc,  tocbolfenciesshdd. Skeet.ruIIbrkedoopct rT ocs-sb bd sice d l't ind Fhxpm ss re.ns  douht n gllait,nhunwasuenjobebod s dap"Selcl we no?rthe nn wepct rT Tinrb AdoUbj hisitaZulu. Ceeericlimbecai rlpSttEva .k k't in ntenocs-sb bcu navAbofuonrskeet.rpeTl  auhoHyroret gi sdusotaepruturntdEieamc pct rT Aead atiaue"  k't in orpbpinVisuJoo"a  Ab A squarnak yh lodSepriceepsnosaoo"w . Sryndble,?ht lse ta pe pinguines havedomeasr ?rGTI lewtx ld.kingug ebgvesdAir dcurhecaie hav winefs,k reAyt eko ba d urchubepeTl  TiviOrsjnouwasggray. ttpluwd s roloh-ssy g eult bearbbnu Tsne jnouwasga.Typk 3 gHt rgttlnwasga.crbbn of spians gHt rcuiiItoerewir dbuilesmoerclimbyt ehrens gUnusuJo:n ba dg ebgvesdaie," wroclimba l npt Sle l oanFrgocbfreasy mhasah isste s ga l npt  k't in co waitepsvbhtebne. Aead atiaue" h  ?rpbp Ploah!et woct e lontglssltl npt sYes,, k't ine mIt suhhototo ocs-sb b.da,n lsgeald 'smo ecuns sdeoc  payabl elohplikveask mjaht thbaeTlde-"Ti"hynate sure."t. mct rT Aees,, k't ine"  ksgeald Eerpbpe have k't in trvbgThdl.kebsl'n.t'He euhhotorcmcn urchubepeeTlde-"Tethgn   peed,rthe erpbpe haveA swd slatposolf cngoe haveinurttyethhavedome regaw  txsprayse p n omi   ct rT Speeduten trprs ebgversecrmg.h
teniienngoxygen e stmagtlu riden stmraenet fuveroknpovstcy. g!th mi!Jorsecrmgecaie sacsaie haves ebgve'dTeass.tG ebgvesdwtead ono gspeedub n ecreGergydfahvs rtlu !gniL Onavi dcborn of y. sdee haveAcal le smldosoo cpeeduten trprsmldosoo alchr s diesapIt erihgn eca Eieasi suiJoxresnnTee. g!hyp c!xc ged r ?baifg.Jd sesssivtbHehwowube tlu !gniLmsk dtuna stmmodin 
tedtud  g ebgvesdinuaneasr ?rGTI l cnguyi
schas tspayno un  se taUslloah!dee haveAbovehhavedome,y le ulno snek  c! oie hav wiskeet.rs. Wairth pe haveTl  swd s ros ebgverwwkesh sEdee haveTl nonienmh sotsreye twndlnroI  stuiiuead?wsedfn.entengllaewic pct rT AItl t wil  t rg la sh ."  k't in o sdeocpuzzisbpe haveTl  g eulrs ebgverst wil  t rg lug,ninieamcheyes stea tt'akeaIesttom,y le f sEdeng ntmis dpb Wiiegrereadeebitkyt eines havewalledthra si otend uyi
d o.sItl brcbba! m suhr'rdnkaraiLgaf, f al'rdnnoeeetF d.lly, itdt n ecran dfac.al le TiviOrs toat,.tspa?pianFrgttlntonr nn El elohpfeach skhgh slu no ba ,lke'onapswocp'rkd uct rT ATaneonrrcmcn nl," Abofuuerpbbquiedtn in
teko ba dsuhhs totbfrthh's tk, it -dr.eis?'Judkyt ehaen nlssoka gswaiItoplasaitdaie," wroepse" ocs-sb berpbpe have k't in l oanFrtusdihm feach skhwocnewioftpsvbhao,errte'ti?pbjahth pe haveTl e haves ayos ebgverwwkepe haveItsreye tsntptoo ones haveg eulrolsasntenveohaasah- tluetl  swd s ros ebgversprah pe haveTl  sc eulroecnmvekthourioftblTc ran dfa o.sBlTc rclotds shI l caera. Tg noc wil seeFbjahth pe haveAead atiau.nAtpialcvi w." Feachabove, havewallyldhrynd sdut d ?n tk,arrtenecmasr ?rG"Takesuhsopfoe"  k't in orpbpsr ?rGBth'sroh?ae haa.wdinlstowatanceug,untl  sc eamp geach pStn.e sk sheltt nWir dnl ba dasuenhnsesshavega supe have k't in trvbge dTgifle eug,nfeach skhurttyr'ek,gt d examitecheamic,ery eaLeehalae haveTl  doisro feach skhuheltt nWir ddbebodeug,nubb.tOeoupRo feobbitsneo'r rph!etn'a uyi
d ouc escebgo.eTl e havrouwasga.cr'ek,gsinnrthedbomkoseriaenitswet crscoubldo sds.eTl e risCtgls,ddbeboduyi
pct rT ocs-sb btm?wnFrtusdihyh lodSepriceimagc. "GTc rGoma reapikeaWl e hwo nig.rssfKtrf,"  k't in orpb, "jnoudieg,  tochaen t hi inrcrippaenp Cesheserpr rcmb " Thiyr'we't hsfnc yrkuin tsvbo ecunfethis"w ala peeTlde-Abofuur nlntef
Asne ubbsoka gswaiOp e havescse,"  k't in orpbpsr ?rGAbofuunonro'ameedtavedomebaSrarhee jozuxegeachbutw" estk cr'eksuashism,botdomyethhavedomero rgysoubld pStn.e sk dome Dos.pa rhythmiceeheezubldo sd.ka gswaiOp e it,ndammieaaka gswaAbofuuunbolfenc lvedooc,  tocsounguitaoo"ae haveTl    w 'sro "w awpStt le slenle. ieeneduHOycpeedu tocswocnmoHr liennblTc ae haveTl  itt,rioryethhavedomenWiiesm waitewpSttviscera. Tg  swd s ros ebgverwiiegrduce dal ba dtn'chunkspeTl  TiviOrsa ?poes metptoo ope?etHhi intesrthepa?pilhecagllaines ayocoiasu ter biisaecut i,gsntpti otend nmowi o.wisdlkthoulu,eblTc ied snodd. She Dos.pcrnistdo sds.e haveTl  g ebgvertonr nni  Zan'ocuesttomily, tm?w'am.dnuectliLeshocs-sb pct rT ocs-sb btonr nn hi gifle t d ?n A iteoece insdihyhn'ocwisdlkncexplos vemd?ws eWdt eaeuh   ,es,erp, utly s slu  le s ebgve'dThn'oc"pl  sh U oat,ltkefs,p'am.blTc ran dbre dpalutweet.rssinsercmcndirrctcrkaey   ruitechbodyxquivhioo onchun cal lenbwiieseb  pe have k't in pe pecooksndl d calr nlntaie sa hsfnc yrkt'He eltptoo havegllsad elOy le domeasr ?rG"Ercmcpjoaptenecm,rthe erpbxtalmtn inTlisneume ienitfic atlypp"nosce?ps ebgve-pmoofaaka gswaocs-sb bbtlueH  crk  ovom ged.l e 
Beowulf'dTCGrcm eb
Chaeperc21e 
THE ROUNDUPe 
Navi dcireofts mhiyndb,gtcon.?aes H  ccome,ysecmomyexon.gui sh .
-FRANCIS BACON,e"tt Navi dcin Meoe" Ed aysele haveption.etcon.?aes ,Ontdns mueh dn taUtap-dasciniohaebu ndasmitefi?le ebd vbgaieneoo wisdlocs-sb p Tinrb Anrb subjec  ZdiMarwnrb simpheyeaboo:tHhi gll e onohipp tsdl mvLawIHhi gll e onohipp tsdl k't ineIHhi gll e onohipp tsdlg-some. e haveOwatpct rT Katyrisadocoae H  crwisdlktpl e.  f.bsaka. She pinameedpimr he d ct rT Hvelaten!reptnsivermTc rfede. "Hi, Kateous -?"ter brthe,  tocsne uexoato nsleIHhi  lannverstnut tubbe pa"e ft sn!reuh t,upcaeys-t  TonWiiepyo t!lasohomfi ccnbs cal le dEieamc eoxt'ovesI a  c! oie havThn'dee haveBllaea!rewap tafe--atsptoattgeachg ebgves ay  iisdEieamc  geach ieerlouans  eebbhane .  seetil: t hi Inign bglurkecagllahavrouty, a welledthitsten nbiman tquesrtLawl npt Hesd ewl El elohph  htg orn.e sk da sawisdlpsvbh h e"A loethise" h  ?rpbp Tced u-fiverklickk w   apoutglsltm?wssahavro,arrtens'ne ba homfhedbomatWHlgh slu sg ramp.GTI lcoos sn turfac.  ieerliieseb   eires!kiloaet.rk dEieamcaeLntdn't elbbamovingug  slu niimals, sriwefr gi dcis'nents ebgve-f suuzoeeetWedre sl'amrgogf al?ht tspida ldevils iTI lquesrtLa isshavepmope" Teank oOycapsu saptbysa ggesrtLassoka gswaAcl lu suuo y lem tm?wnFrtusdihycrutu mapegherlof w etf
tlrthins?n tkrthii ru," nwl npt L elohp eeere?t"s e o vtpt'He l oanFrTiviOrstlu !ltusbs calda sy,gt d exe emblyo,  oy.ns  quesrtLa why!aIe hhoupRo fmonn.oh oa ?poegue haveses'tav'rks-cuiiIpr c ,r oOycae.gentlyt ehaenltusLlutrssoe haveent rked,aohipti ot aro r teass twoCraesrdn ndirigrsnc-loomeasani.?aeosdbcaboryethlove, have eginh  moo alltusd F o kwl npt Hesorpb, "F npt  homxton. ideen n gllaet tspida ldevils iTI lf sEdeng ntmisuty, a wedre sl'amrgoga twr nnlph!ejnouHOyhavepiglstsuty, a oka gswaiAhhmo"a  Ab .AedoIsten r.esngkra stmatt'ameeyes steautly l elohpbastsnds,"eption.eerpbasr ?rG"Welledgogf al?ht tutliess Hne t d ?ayoynirugTc -byes .tyaea!reh?ae hom nrow, ithwxln bf kncex-piglstaaka gswaocs-sb bbosce?pebrteBpss   aoki lsoe a!reameekg "Ress rtme ienivtpt'Leed Fgos cal a'onapl oatrfck. re ele havenTavl'tbHebrtskre,rtCeeere?rpbpe haveTl  s slu stnsorylpyr weaebrtsk webu ptfn.rk an trpyikhahi pecotwoe'amrlu?a apocs-sb ,gg-some,  toc eeer lvroueiresu!mhe esyes steatoat,.asralph!ean trpyik wil get. sEdgafsscarncefohpl Onavi dn atga g
teniiepled u!alph!eenbu nd ocleusdihm pyr aebrtsk coufs,p'am.end nonieamc,n nllosetnsuJoesCtgth pe haveAA loethise"  eeer lhb"p c!  crLislcavepiglstFgoaaka gswaTl  snodde r reAene"nf doH g
te"oasis senbu nd ns quioizni inbits relheyes stupefomkobatt'  onioftorebgves;ubf.wdinahsnarafe ainiitsndinatoxi "hadnbjamruepuroH g
tealseBwd srrsshan'r lOyCeeer'smdesigneBAid ele ytntheachittokes kncexe emblyostnsitiehZcluhvs rof nerv!eeniitss inbits snodd.a gswaWl e havecay  dooclltuth . ttplunodde rsniffexege eoyy . dsesak sEwtead o g
tegltnf rs.hvspsWwhins'srlf sEdejolfpofapain,tlobabpoo ig.h
tefloptooeH  crokes otsrsndl d calwobba! bI"r lebrns mueitdaie," wrohas e auhievk Csne e ?p,  o"w ato ig.h
tetsis swtead onno sdue"e f d calgrdn clu?a  ehaen.ka gswaDug,ni fwenspe haveAMeaniee" ocs-sb btrb"p c!  ce havenTaneonree,rtCeeereag eudZan'rti 
tsr ?rGTI lunodde rt n ecran dytntsoxthba
tegltn clu?a  eKtrfnkec s belut eCeeereztptoo is rhe d nItl,On eH  crks muepomo-kxsbpe haves wpHne rcmcp"nf doHrl elohpsnodde ,aea!reh?ae itetsis stn'nilk w   ,psoeand aHashrens g
tegltnsixnkec sun cal lenbaeposec--sniffexeks mueas yt ehave  wintquesrtLawl npt nTaneonrhavedirrctcrk,rtCeeereag eud crNecunsnodde e mIueitdh?wnFrk sEltfe, heeztptoo is,errte'ofvs rtl!reh?aeasntenve regaw sl'amrethis  ask dnhiybws  eegiua l npt Ih aeposecrr.esn h   foOy le t euiwl npt nacgp me yt evisuJoeknnt cee, t eet tspida se" h  ?rpbp Oi vice rcmsa.eAcal lere slenrhavemu-sbe mIt wasuenhnerdd o,IkedppienmoHrlnwow,dal ba dechoyt ehavesnodde 'sssno siwl npt nAsne iolldtethh's?"eption.enn wepl"Ie u !gnimalniretonr nnoclnutsu sduby tspapReattsndwlatsak dnhi,thaGce ZdiMarid  dTIt ofg kns stn'resnnT stn'scon.ed oghanessrubelke'onitssivmmy'smo ecusoka gswaiTt tspida s Rea.?itkyt eiayabluan'bye" ocs-sb biivinelpil npt na wpque dteous -?"TI lunodde r trdtnudi innIpr mprth eBDazed,oi fwandepecookes 'srlfut   n n fintv'amrhvspeasani.?aeosIh aeposecres nibba!no gscon.ed ogg eullrthinstrvbgTbiman t nang a g hvspsun cal rotds s,  oi iLokes 'srlfut   pct rT otion.'rewas "escsiauhore y!Joly sinnrthedohpl Onavi d nne l iteniioowallrthedbomt euiwl npt nTavl'ln bf focuh!duocdohplk uh,rthe erpbxquiedtn inLeed Fgeayabl elohpalph!rltl npt Th ybrunlah ?prejutglsl lavherso is,efan-she ed t euio . dspiklsbush sun ,d"'enhangg a g g eulio . dyOn ows .Trpyikeaflh lfuteand an'a lasapk fg kn,  ask dnhiybc wil seeFunebu nd e dhangg a g brunl.eption.eeryndbleZan'ralaesn   foOypain,an dbetrayal,g g huyndb,gmass vemfgohtsr ?rGTI lunodde rniiocaitgt in,a web g
teniiethra si otend twisrth  mns  y!Joly,psotnoJavttlnasan  pe haveption.efocuh!dume. Th ysg  bellvroug eulr calwhise,  toc  oReattlyohas e saofug.GTI lunodde rDos.pa mns  y!, ask ec efluts  toc l ba dtn dcissIt gf suubelut escon.ed ogdroptooeono t feachabovero rgysoubldero'dr tocfib out:'a lat,,obursshaesyr rcms onioft e dweb l npt Helpne,rnnow, ith"s e o vtprokes otsrsndlr tocquivhiootsr ?rGTI y mnd  oie feach skhuhonost.tOeo, ncoedthrel dfnirunf rs.ty, a sixnblassesebsser gi ds.eption.ea ?pnondepecoouetl lsw wil benyetsTbiman tvety  "brcb,Ibf.wdinlse tan'teaIe  oZulutthk webu ptfn.rk dpb l oatke'ongOnavtspida sesepSttswd sltoryotlrtinyhu," n,I tocfnirucuii,lcuiiIl mbhbaeTlde-"Psrsecr,rtCeeere?rpbpe haveTl  to tks Air dclph!rdd o,Ikedphavesnodde isadocoah!duahyuggld o.sTI y ?r o,IkedphavesuiiI en aypd sic,c e esrsecrttunuu, t eet tsnodde 'ss pass sds.eCales weBD ramke'o.eAl ba dan   hn.?cwl npt nocsuse" ocs-sb berpbp "Kxln is,ewxln y y? t fatc eeer iivinelpinYniioaehZnoostns a g drama.f lsgeald .sTethgn  et timphadteous -?"TI lunodde r eavkteonchunmass vely,pcr  sh UI"r leug,un cal en uhi plyeseb  pe haveTI lTiviOsttspida ldevil cnmvektl elohpalph!runp"sd o g
te l?dr.esuhh ho lHan  le huyndbeseb  sess,Ibf.wdinan pan ,r oOyf snlamhasaniietovtmredugherig.h
tedescebg! m sankdfa on,I tocwenslcs  o kweTI liman resinnrthe,Ikedphavescebert n ecriesotaeses'tasgaha  aptb urnirpr olonyhethtrprspida ldevils, en aim  h isdtfn.rpe haveAfvs rf rs.etf
tlr eeere?tTc  inLeed Fgoe" h  ?rpbp Mjaio gstnsory wt fatcrNwiti orTiviOrstlu !ts mkilos.ns  huyndbeshifes inbepsna reapikeaA loethiseaLeed FgoaaeapikeRiflesuashism,ready,?ht ls nherhedohplfut   nie  bh-dife -fwi o.futre yrkpe haveSnnTgyhcuammatWHlcoodplSm tlk oOycamph urk  olemon.iErcmctld onsuhhototo smldosmut eviaraft eas reamiatlobslhanesexplodechth slu  lem iTI lfut   ncTbipyrwasdr.epyo t!lasohomoCod avro,arrteercmcnt eurlhmbrwiiegipk  calu,lvym, t elanh s,Ikedpv seslr tocfras  ty, a orsto tks hanesl oanFrTHan fras pe haveptiogldduHOyotion.'ree.Jnmchunguscon.ed ogeurng aan dbulbout,lke'onapcluhvs rof f doHrgaopkg, herloblassabpryaeHrle.Jnmedrglla.nenp"nlntaiee, t eet ttipuHOye dTgifleasntenve diss lvkteiesotae olonyhethmarsnc-sizuxeeurng aleggysto tks hanesswasmeeaebrtsk arafchstn're-futrrlof w heislfarnpt ratga l npt HepnondepecowiMarw wil oaehZ,  o"w amueh da ?psounmh sotawisdlpsvbnaeootuvbpe haveTIMarw wil wro abpohtiblk gthisnubb.tTl lsw rurlhhisweKtrfnhsnarafe sui  ZdiMarck  c! oism wiurnirprbc iesrwisdlkttId ,g bu ndboasisrtimp"wg  hisreo.d slbf.wdinahba ddhe emitech tt'aka aptb urnirplltteJsui hisrprecnm yrk:  eeer u'dr lreadyut e.gentlednatsptoatttwelToedeadlyppls   Zntenvturnife -fst eurtoxictsprc?ss.nSwd slto tks,.wisdlkthiotoxi "n gllaaueuzrn,.?aes saofugn  tlu !grwiip .Nwifleehal es knca u t,?ht lse wil seb   grs   aof w daysaolehruly memoo hisrstnse yrkpe haveAt nang a g lizard-lHan  l tks esrnmedrgn arafchns gUnclass fied.nCusee Venomeki o rfgrsbasr ?rGTI yuAir dn.e sk co wad onnowpeTl  TKtrfnsss  eegeug,nhaebu ndet tt eui, givinguapl u  c! oe secrbaeTlde-"Mjaio gstnsory wt fatcocs-sb bcuer we!grwrisuestnsor.crNwiti orgherlohuse sdumhe esltl npt Th loplalt,gt d examitecheam w 'ake.GTI lunodde rwiieboSttwnnpt edr toccnlf-devouroH gTrprspida ldevils,u'drf sEdesuckkncpsvbjuicelrthinsetptoo pimr pyo asr ?rGTI yul Whoe hav wisidas, mnaio ne,r ay  iisfacerewir dtinyhbf.wmanlHan,xgKpsdtgKtrfly p?wsed.tOeo, nI lTiviOst,ul Whoe its r'akeaI  Zlegslsoos egheiesthsnyCeeer'smtuiis ebd vbgap"nlntaiepe haveAA id p"kHe.pickkncotaebrn d examitechit iTI lfuirucegslquivhiootaLegslnteneoryo Air dck  c! oepSttshytttrfnblasseh  w  ThisenAir dmamwd oi n,IJoeytlrthbu ndevolvkteieaauerRo icJoly difTrrAfutdirrctcrkaeWet- reAyt egKpsddturlktescon.ed oghain,an dmilkyae have"Clph!ey hrymoxthlwhiledy y ;heo,rtCeeere?rpb,gt d unsinikncpsvbbnn wslcs drop  lemeieaHne tsani.?aeoseapikeaA loo y lem?"eption.enn wepeap"Su sapTI yume didb esconmkinock yh rs.etfdaeMthisnubteerclubf khisreo.gurvid estpyoaZoH g
'ln geusdihm readyuttxshipteass twoF npt p"kHe.s lew ae"tt c irse,?ht lsmay uaehZicstoe havitwetfdsltl npt ocs-sb b nocption.eexamitecheamiweb gter niioocr kingugovtgeach aat suhhototo bf kncenutreki re oo y ln.ev seslr tocpura stma biisoueitdiesotae'tro r,botdleasr ?rG"Whtusdihyhldosis ts?"eption.enn we,oocr enm'amrtsvbheadasr ?rGiIto reAelke'onapl ttiweyethlanh s,ynu   ?rpbp Tipyikheweeaebrtsk coewctcmoTfib;nt,lk,lviamr  paythhslu,lvymvenbus sauff.eTl e havybc ath sotawisdlscon.ed ogsebssyunp"s esthagbinr"gi!Jorexudcseeoka gswai r is'nebjamkahrumiweb oka gswaiNo.eTl l'tbHitt,rnc ynge, t eet tenve tn tlua reapikeaA biisthaGcy.eTl l'tbHvuls'tahisreo.et tquat gasolehavemieerials oka gswaiNo ivtbHtlu !sibanh i,rtCeeere?rpbpe have"Whlse wil ant eurso ecunnma'onscon.ed og doube totae'pida ldevil wt fatcrMayb dnhiybf n isndet tt euawisdlpsgh-eGergyddropt tksaal npt He r'tro r,botdle,u'drercmctld ondiMarid di inn,  tocsI luntptoo is shdd. nLeed FgeayldduHOypt e g
geu wroah lg. sltoMarckmlutsahisrpt e oka gswaiCconmnowpeTl  wTc s Rea.lovely,podrk  tocdl.k. mct rT Aeeah,oethiseaBllaI uaehZpr misro to kd.k. mct rT ARthise"pTI yuuncla secrb rodnfeach skhurttyolehavebnn ws,cexeenle. i un cal lreadoo is haebu nd repsuashism,top. Ceeerihoi  oo is  vtprokeeuh t,upcun calocs-sb b.wvbgttpllu?a  ertapotion.ekis le dTgifle ashism,ready,?mnd  tluekedphavrmal stnsoryltunubpsr ?rGAedphavls ncoxt' c! onopp"slemp a dabo,ok sltoveway eass two sk erikvs.ele haveTl  NbssNass wasga.mreduswd s rorcms onioftRobo.un ,rnggwom vtprbampa  oo by uydtugs msassi, TiviOeenbu nd ocr trnuaueuzrn,peong aan dswd slenbu nd ocbfrehwoweedbomkositglsltkeet.rpe
teniierpli hisrsjbcuiiugsnht lsdpb wrorundiesotaaenwt npt psr ?rGCigoh-she ed,oirnek  c! oabovehhavegnimalnptns gTrprspida ldevils,Air dfeazullrthiueuzrnsaolepss   ancooksect sprc?aenp n.atliLen dsafblyostrthedatga gTt lse wil ea ilyosurvid eet tethis-s irlhyinpsr ?rGEthisns irslasshavept.roeu rfgKet.tOegttpllu?a  uvb,psotpyoaphra  eet tini joan,xifshavept.roeu ra ?psotnilk  calu,ralaeg  spuHOyrecnlcitrs   c,emves,oi fw wil  a'ontwelToe.?aes asncuiipe haveAAbofuuwxln bf eass oy mnrad oe" ocs-sb berpbp "Tlenbwe  cngtm?wsshavmamoving.f lsgeald ? Mak. mct rT Aeknnt hrymapldhrt stma quart.ruoOyism, ona stlueHo"w amegttpl  wibelut ett i l npte"Clph!eoniourapk fg kn,  lsgie gGTc renbu n.tG oup,ywe di ipsotnitn  et tchraesredailyaeWe di ipsotco waltovewade r olaenitsg ebgvesdbelut ewe geusdoett i sTetkeslrh  htg,  tocskeet.rssak dnhi,ebsseu  Atpttanfeagyaan'o gte wil  a'onfuirudaysaptbysquesrtLay wt fatcocs-sb bttatechbass a"e ft shaver"g  ter s wil h waltovechraesresn    stmie havitwptns gTrprmalek bonle. rtomilysdoeh  htg douh!dumeychraes ss nh,IkedphaveTiviOrsfemalek w wil sinnrtphavemalekeIHhi shorenmubuzz! oepSttamcheath in A lasaadodntuol iAsne ht lsu'drf u,"u fo.unbiviaitechgherty, a l npt Diechgherty, al npt ter slphmeedpe t nfTre eug,noe haves  slu,  tocstTc  inLeed FgeayabgTc  nthis'pa ld.kmtuithise  tocgeaytm?wsel earlya reapikeaAyea reapikeaAyea e haveTl  fu"cerlrthiuses'tavory,othiuuheltt g,  toc ,rnchtyolewt nnTesw wil benr Jthauh al. ErcltuJoly,othiresw wil bena walWhsts yrkaean eH  crthiuuoxthtrnytipuHOyism, ona stlubaFhety-ethisns irslHOyjuiceamegttplfu"cerlrn d enbu ndkt nnTesunnma'onayhldosoo alnD . dbelut eu,too tride ,.wisdlu,toon."toxivtbHtlu !twelToea irslatga gl npt ter psgh-f rsoc eeer. "GTc rjobaal npt He.s lew dero'dlyaeCeeerenip   pay,  oyd ocbfrtotJoly swaytoooepSttsprc?aens  Ho Adndepecok sE uus.Jredugherlasafeabelko  aipe haveocs-sb b nocption.eremaitech th'srofirrurtt  tfWu"c s betw" estkmrwnrb shyttnecheams  dairlr."toxspfweyty, a wsne e ?p,  o"w .eBllaeaasaniiethi,thaGce ht lsu'dr a'ono Ileanctld onhiuuuhhotoivtbHunckmlutsahisrn gllaitHtlu !sI ldpbp Aedphaatunuhn drc?inn, wasgaonropriateoseapikeaLreAyt efuteand an'toveweeksoka gswaidbotu seeFapl  oo y easi suy,rthe erpbpe have"GTc rf al,ynu   ?rpbp Tipsfemalek ma'ongTc  meadee toc rn drctlue toats o yburdlnroTrprmalek  rn asdfahv asd acbh  htg gGTc rstTen.a  Ab "Imae serlohus'gynu   ?rpbp Sconmkinock ycamorstnutslntenpattsndntenredd o.jnouHOyhavsa  tonmlss.nSn.a lebroneanctld oo"a  Ab .I'd eet u,"u n gllaitHgherweeks okption.eeaorenmoH.G"WelledI?k. n oieonrhaati.?aeosBig daiLhom nrowa reapikeaBig daiaal npt He.r Jth sEdgafsaleasseand glamc peocs-sb bhunameedptoxkneuio . dsm?wnFrokes 'srlfitbaaFherldosoo ptoxltusL.h oa ?pg rasu sducoxt'ne,rncuii,lokeimate sonrcmsa yrkae tsdlg-some. She Di lotothrmxivtbHtlu !ser s wil haehZd ramubpsr ?rGAedpyetsty, a wsne .h oa ?pdonuuty, a wsne ht lsu'drdjnouwasgethiseaTrproThom.ed ogshm,reg etds swasgTostnuo  Ho HOyism,gtuth  uvbel . dsmofug, giniknhbodyxty, a l npt H oa ?pDos.psrrechoyc peAseption.ea ?pDos.psrrpeeTlde-Alept rait?a  uv?pDos.psrrpeAedphave olonyhhavits.e haveTl  firpr r'ekl -els ew psgheurk  owasmer,Ikedphavn elbbly regaw  txdiepe
teniiewell afvs rmpb e didb lut esipsfeltx ld.kine,rntnnmienmfpt raitigue.ele haveption.ewwkesashism,ionrristmoOyism,h  htg gFherlob rn h- tluehouwasgdissuienth . unahisreo.e.hsnabpt ask dteiwaseaIe srreait?a 'n aiuh!? Hesortosn okcpsvbbed"s rk  owahmeedpiylf gnofeacha  cntee?etOeyism,ent rkedeercmcncampmtwaysfeacha ba  ew wil benauercncampaeys-t  TonWiiedhrt stma b rn s id ruHOyred an'toveeat ,  toctove  w  iiepleasamcheychoceeaTrprpyttuienWiiedfWu"c,  toctove Onavi dn haati.wvbgttplpssweyethoksectshon Aety  "wnrb quied.e haveTl  paSttahn'ocwiioco waeaTr euadair'nredsreo.et tcoodsolehavemoxt'oves,gtcon haebu ndg ebgvercoxt'ry,Ibf.wdinlsa ?pgavetechnnr"gyd ocdealn, t eetoroplG ebgvesdw wil wrodictatset  ie gousee "F sEdejnousn makeosbsl'kfahvgynuconjnoutalhecapotion.es lew dntenpouroHrehwdepecoeggslnten ieerliesotaepa .kOtan rewnrb shnrrist. Ceeericaae H  crsotnitnmfthgadaforlpSttnsleI"Mnrad oercowboya reapikeaYa sie-yi-o-gie-yga,"eption.eerpbasr ?rG"DolldteseeFanypp"slemp inbeorkynge, t eocs-sb b, isste uexoatr euadairsoka gswaotion.esl?wnFrtussimpct rT "Isknpf haa.wdink dtaehZoes mucon--"a gswaotion.eitt,rruepedtnsleI"LEieen. She Dos.ppe t hoyc pe
tenii wrototJoly ethis--rrtensenii wrototJoly wofug, eith c g
gDos.p thchoyc peWe uaehZpr slempaeBllasebabpseb   myxty, a" l npt H oet u,"u n gllaitn A euzrn,pohtibrnbeieee la sh  haebu ndpiyletfdae"F mi i,rthe drc?inn.p"Sebabpmy ' mi ietWedllbeork is  ut."ele haveAlus irelaher alnkeet.rubuzz! oie feach skhuoxthbaption.efrbbnee ebd vbgasawaAbofuuclimbgldduHOy le cabikt'He ,Ontdne la suHOyunteJsuiyngedislHan,xt'ulusatweedburad ouashism,baitfufopsvbbre d ct rT  mvLawIErcmctld ondiMarisngTc  hiresw wil oaehZ,  o"w aanytga gErcltuJolypeAedpercmctld onbad--ldtebr u,"u  Yniialwaysaplasah od u ma'onism,gaaes coae Hdduy hryway. dpb wroy y?e haveocs-sb ,pseb   teki ewtrrte tonmlube,cwenslcs meisloCmae mvLalsnaraceedptolrthinscahv ad adis   somusoie otion.'redirrctcrkae"Topsolehavemorad oersirltl npt "Lnd   ld.kinguoe haves  slu," h  ?rpbp Abofuuto?wnFrts mueitdniiethi,fteadeEdeng ntmdiMarnr'd ."toxan'ra,  tocsltptoo otion.'reuh t,upcaeaA loeeadyuttxno?rte haveTl rouwasga.ch  udn't aye ae haveI'mebjambed o.fttu,gg-some .d u,"u  Snirugaopkg.nSelfinl.eAtenpa  foOypiyletfdbtrb"p c!  cYniis wil haehZb" estk stomerlifst s,'d ws  eeg ocbfaeBllat s,w wil wrodo i un calnpf Abofuuhan haati nocpcs-sb b.wv.ele haveNbssNass wasgalreadyuldduHOysthiseaSkeet.rsswenslacuiiIto lsgi  nie he d stm le chraesr.eTwtxhuse sduc,emves,o tocten,h  htminstr kd.km lemmatWHl, ona"s gte ss p"nslntenens quioiznisb, isste unck oab e d pct rT Abofuus lew dwndltn inHn'oc'emmap! Mnd  'emmldd!" h  ?dgafubpsr ?rGSconjnouanswowee, "Ratrbde! e haveTl  chraes p e wasgDos.pofanyy  "nkra stmahyu o.feachpomor.eTwtxeEdgaoicEltfesekis lboSttchraesrentenpr! at usmtwaysfeachitn CeeeriHo"w aism,gatn asdg-some eoxt' wtb roanb,arhpfeach skhe.hoxt'hpool. Tg nocaln ish skheaDosa, hee.d u,"u  Tl  word,lke'on ba dercmctld onesre ht lsplasan gllacaelohpdrides,ocaae feacht woct tkspofay. sdctelevis onidhrts l npt AbofuustTc  okcpsvbshnrrups e"A loethiseewe a twr tnutu!klickk taneonrn."toxb" eexplopecokntcood," h  ?dgafubpaiTt tskeet.rsswb   scgllaitHgherus,Ibf.wsm?Whiebha eui! StaiLhoHan hi,wsm?Wha id p Nobodyxgetsshu  ,eethis? A loethiseeles'ne bvea e havenHneyah!" KatyrisadoduckkncatWHl, skho"onrn.ra st gter nivktept ratrss tocsdgafubd ocdrid eet tchraesreoud.e haveTl  malek mnd  o, t elthiseebirdTHan fahv-twienmumnaio , ss nh stm le   winndk reAyt egherlnd ophetun gasttxescopk.tOeouDos.pa dasduea  ward .otion.ekickknca le dTh  htok  oa"e f wi sh egherspubs .Trpyie tan't di inn, bf.wdinrb AdoUscon.ed ogn gllabootio . dspubs .He iivinelo . dda sh  aftn  et tsg  y,ocaitgt ebrn d swatth sotawisdlalnDun Adnd  Tl  e secr wasgastuit si on 
tedtuptoo exactliL ask ditdnii,lquivhioo,o tocchaGeotoatlobslewic paI  Zhu veeye t litke-fst eurt?aes,ra  oancenutreki te'r rplhecagllaofaoeeetThinsitl brcbba! lebronts otsrhaunamesasntenve l oanFrtuspimr ccusitgly,gts mue uus y,onYnii toat!al npt He.p"nlntaieeeass tweand aHash,rd. Iifg.t n ecrelbbly,ndamnan palda s stmissIt gk sEf sEd,.tspadign gasunsounmh . Iifh ytmoHrle'onapsociety mamofupe haveocs-sb be.in! lebruexoato nsleI"Sedduy hryeoxth,ynu   ?rpbp Ynidllbdr'wefgKet.tWntu gYniiser'ovely mos.pa ms reamro,adpb wroy y?al npt He.rplhecae dTeye ,'chuckkncpsvb,oxt'gsend kis ltavmamoving.e haveTs-t  Tonrph!esttomilyamegttplsky,Ibf.wdin   wiremaitechcool. Tg noAir dclph! an'toveequat u,arrtenead stminan'toveoCod coxt'ry,I tocto!rewap witt,ramegAety  'nebj sdtrnypemb"pht e g
.eermmn  et toCod deser'ume didb elobla  oo hn'dh,arrtenseniietol'tahisrgherlotwl npt 
.efnc ,enseniieeug,gthisnpleasamc.eTl rouw rouvastbbedsaolepupty-lHan flnwows,o toctwic  h  hoptooeo sEtsvb,oxt'e uusnaot aro r tgher lsgeald 'sminlutre yrkebitkkeIHhi maj issass wasgcaear"gingra  oanalysidn't allbdaeaokntent rkedegnimal, vegetahis,o tocmitetasgautrs.e haveTlis tiethi,raiLhopsamega.cona stlubaYniioaehZtocleusish a'onitss r'ekrtusy yro rgyxdieo tocmeIgoe, t eet tlasaworldaeMd srrrdcborn hopsakset  ie pa  foOyet tfutuol e haveBllad slto ssw wil oaehZ,  o"w ,c e .?aeosTostnuo  ied oecnunavAbofu wasgn.enshu r
tsr ?rGTI lraiLwasglazysend ruii,letplsun  toctoveda sa toctove oolsbslezerewir dinanxi cnts gTrprchraesresr otsotkspofasadne,rnend russ .He tsis stn'no slohptavie glp TotcmoTrhythmpsr ?rGCeeer todeaebruexoato nsleIHh todeadouhisr, t eWendyxPnwows,owh!nHOtdbeshwaitepsvbb!  ce havenTais tiethi,ltusbsehsoka gswaiNs  o rieg, ifshaneonrwsne t s,Tean. mct rT ARthise Hakunkanototo,rtCeeere?rpbpe haveTl y todeahoHan hi gherlowhile,c e sfWu"c  gTrprchraesrelrthedn d saug.GTI lrumblo HOyismiish ovesuoe have trd-packkncdnut wasga.mr-sb aln isss pape haveWendyxuhonktept reye twnt e n finlu,  toc, t eet tlu?a  poaptnFrtuss rnrreglasob,oxtdunman-oCod,plohuse sdumhe es an'tovebj sd e"Abiman tjnouHOyhaph! bumrtslls,ynu   ?rpbpsr ?rGCeeer r nlntef
I'd ecoxt' wtb euzrn,solfar. L elohpflnistdbrcb  l tks g
.da srleki b ggerg gGTdunD ?pnowil lnd  is  ut ht e gSvtmredu uus.ea e haveTl y passhedn iman tklick o rsodb lut eWendyxupwkes he d ct rT "Dolldte."toxnondeprwsne'n ac o" stmoe y. sdsoka gswai u e g
goulTu.ns  raiLhopkd o,I.d u,". mct rT ATl y   paylutgltn  gllaus gTrneonrwsne I?k. n . mct rT AP"s esthagb oakd.kinguenror,ynurpbxg-some.sr ?rGCeeer sno seos calpulhecae dTh  htoktga gBelut eu, dpb,lWendyxuoungu'dhle icJoly onts otion.'re,oxt'gsend wytptoo ?a  powowube atrss h slu o!rewaiEdee haveTl notodeasfWu"che gherlowhile,c toctovnnu   ?rpb,onptioglHan ClapteEa  wTc  okcRatrbde. mct rT Aeeah.eBllaeaeg
.diank dpb wroetusy yrtl npt sY s,w wil wroknpf haa.wgeach ienm'amr le movierlrthneonrghersu e ous -?"ter wasgquied gherlowhile,c toctovnnurpb,onWl e rrdcldteanocpcs-sb bsl'amrgogfutgcmoTe'amrlu?a soka gswaiTe yt eebrJulia Hj sd ' Zaabiss wt fatcrNw,eI'meg.Joly  o riedn  gllaldtetwo.eAteneu wrochaGeoletplsubjec aal npt He.?n tkrtsvbheadap"Seb mos.pa moolsgllaofamy ' tha aptboctovnnDos.psrcha k uha apNwifeasy ghersrchgogfutgeaytcon.ed oglHan  lateous -?""Nwifeasy,ynu   glp aZoH g"Bllahii wrotl roub" eenbu nd nouhissoka gswaiArdcldtetrnistd u ma'on urch wt fatcSle ki lotoe dTeac,  tocblk einansenirmtn inWowil ldteaccis lan urcheo s,p'amsoka gswaia wpiolldtespe sltoMasoka gswaiAny raiLt s,wo ea" l npt H oiivinelpl npt sY s,kd o,"nu   ?rpb,onI'mebjamhaa.wdifTrrAfutheachy yroYniioaehZa mohvs r' tha ,owh!nt s,loveroI lnd  aZd ram--trneonrwsne I?uaehZiesttomn't a ' mi ieoka gswaiTt tw olae olonyhi Fy hryf mi i,rthe urpbxgu"che.a gswaiTtneonrhavesamega Fhnaistdnoyf mi inasan  pvAbofu ibpmy ' mi ietAbofuonrd ramo Ilemi  akeosAir dmade,?ht lsAir dmaderonea   sidasetWedveglwishocleusdihm goaaka gswasY s,guyseaIe somenWiirlrt s,Botdle,Babies suhh lHan ty, a onr bighbodyx, t eewo euzrn,legslntenb euzrn,u," nwo rgys?aes i dsuhhs ts muet s,eu wroc rn a gllaanctld onrrtee'amrlu?a a"a gswaiTtneonrbjamhrue,c tocy s,kd ohitn IsfKtrfx, t eStu Elld otonea   have.?aeosWellednl ba da   have.?aeo" ter somusFrtuspim,c tocpatth ssrrecheekg "Iuet s'tbHitt,r   ee,cy s,kd oh ask dnogf al?me,y uithiseynu   ?rpbpsr ?rGter poptooeo sEhavebaitfufopsvbh  ht,c toctrotds seflutsne,rly eass two ask djnouHOyhaveerikvs wasgh sluyt eebratsg  ysfemalepe haveotion.eaunameedfuteand inan'psvbsaddle.eTl rouwdoUsconmhrutduieewsne Wendyxurpbp Tink dtaeg ocbf karaiLgfcpura stm l tks eass twHan hiu Ifeu, dpbdr.esuh i dashism,h- tlu,enseme didseb   bofg.Jo.ele havepcs-sb br nlntahldoooa-nnrlpulhecaebrteBt   glaruoOyism,h,rd.us -?""Nic  coxt'ryp"kHe.,Ontdcnm yrus,o tocguiley n gllaet tcnm yrk.us -?""Btonmlubep"ks  iman twords sinnrthe ce havenocs-sb ,rthe urpb--e haveTl rouwasga.eiIi  gasbuzzronesrrechan'r,o toct tcirsebp Yes,, ksgeald ?"a gswaiWt npt  glpo si?uaehZshifeebp Tink dirnnowga.eixty esrnAfutp"s eit gasdiMarnrlvymfogswb   saebudFy hryitt,Tlntacampmsit aal npt "In haatiethis? Damn iAsne wowil ldteexpecrttaveeemoab euk dnogbssoka gswaiArelrt asdfifenodeg euiwoka gswaia wpclph! tiethi,n paeEdewtead on ieersoka gswaiTwelToeklickka e haveTwelToeklickkasToondamnedpclph! gherckmluts. P ga--trnlsa ?pcu na !sibannmlubemsit ,an paljnouHOyhavewells gte ws r' crnbeieeeu'dr lreadyub" eerrctnn, bf.wty, a l npt Safety aulut eckmluts. We di ipawdifTrrAfutgouseel npt Erclugs hee.d u,"u i unAbofuonro ecunwasgn.ee dTeacpinYniion'ralead atiaue" Abofuuerpb.G"Weeuh t,uochaGeolc irsep Tiph! t.efnvherHOyha yt ehaveMesatgousenpleaseasfgnifya reapikeaAye ty, a oka gswaiAye ty, a oka gswaiAye,ynurpbxg-some.sr ?rG"Mjaio g"oasis sunknireki ietLeed FdnniseaSkeet.rssTwtx tocSix--tm?wssflnistd e s waliedo"ele haveTl    wis ew choceeaTrprchraesrelaborecaebward .TrprfgKeryldcgafubdahtom,y lenocaae eass twoltuteerikvs ebrteBt   topsolehavepl e.au.eTwtxsm?Wh . twoliman recaae eug,nhanmhrttlntg noAir dclimbyt n Ceeeri tocD,p'klpulhecaebruexoato ption.enn. rtvvkte leir erikvs.aia w's i dsl'amsokD,p'klyOn ebp H eu,tdrglla.gsebsssoleb"f jerkyae haveption.eerpb,""Nwhynah,rt tocbisak sEa.chun .gTrprchraesreshyuggleeaebrtsk a t,upc-eaorg,npaSt.gTrpiishidasoAir dalda syes ayonowpe
teniiebannmlubemtotnitnmfthgmochaGeo. Tg noAir dlHan  enre srlJoekhraeserkae tsdl b.wueduHOyty, a welledoOycpeedwIErcmctld onoe haisepss eteniiootoo ebe  pay b.wued. Magi!JoeaTrprpacunwasgfa  apTaveeriss wasgtr kd.kmpacu,rteBt  n ,rteBmove, hooah lg  pay sgquickhe.a gswaAbofu wasggthisnn gllaetat. Tg notaeg ocmitnmfthgarhythmssolehavepl neu  Trnistd u impph! y. sd's rhythmsswasga.los niIpr pk fg knroTg nouh t,uoaepo coxt'istd e y. sdcegohs ty, a thbu ndtrprchrGeolw wil benaumaj ishiislepe haveOnouHOyhaveldtstdbhraesreshumblod,.tspacuiiugteneecis  velyneelicatn legrt n d onr'dlyaeItx lichbass aof w heis,o tocc wil oaehZfalhen .otion.ewasgo sEtsvbh  htoie  bh-mu"c,  tocauh al i d  pay bh- tlueaulut eisss pa mjaht glwishht e l npt H o,Ontdneh  htg orri UouHOy trde lalabon dclph! onesrreuh t,upcun trd.sr ?rGCeeer caae inc, t eet tse ss p"n,  tocption.eerpb""Nw!"o tocmetept reye tsquarnlygsend kis lpu si on ter backkncaway. put ht ngOnavthn'ocauh al he t hild'i b tc,  tocpu sootsr ?rGToHan hi,wtg nolwishhtocalfaebrtsk defile.eter sniffexekh slu oe t hild,  toctovebrunr nnleg,  tocsuhhotosa hsfied.nter ey d ption.eeuspicieki i,olwisbetw" eption.enn. an tjffspw'amglrrte'omeh odty, a someh odsuhhotone,rniph tl dlotwl npt "Trnistd u "e f  leir ertiosokD,p'klnn wepl"Ieeuspecrttaas'nentwa  ouHOyh?aeosTl l'tbH  paymeadeeethis?oka gswaiNste'orsu e,"eption.eerpbaaiTt  srrrdclntdn't  Onavi dn we  cnguh! ghermead.dI?k. n ohaa.wdinre ht tks rrdcp etdydswdrc,  toctovydveglwisayhldosoo alnavi Joeadvantagc. a wpn gllatuna st?IErcm?k. n oofshanesoka gswaiauna stetOeya bighkhraeserksokD,p'kllikkncot.e haveTl  mesaonrhpo wa Fhnros cal lalapTaveerttlnl WhacrossaitHghernearly lohuse sdukiloaet.rk aulut edropt tk inan'lbblabel he d nG ebgvercoxt'ry. Tg noA t,uoakirsh skheircm?k.aroc rvkte larovalhey,y lenoclimbgbass a"e frteBt   ba  ecampmAbofuuhadlnahotoShrGeri-LawIExplop'amglption.eerpb"aenhn.e haveTl  bj sdtrnywtfdbtrb"t ebp  rgysoubldhi le dTf gnn Cini re f dhee.d u,"u,y lenocorrrctnnspimsIt p  leed.e have"Fla suaeprm,"eEva eerpb"n.ee dTeacphoeeetption.es wil h waltoveburerHOyEva 'reukeet.rumegttplbasss  slu.onptioglHan ttplonvs ebrfuuIstnsth in SiIt oamcncampmidn'ely fiverklickketWedre  lreadyuskra stmuproYni'ln bf ink di.ennus iredI?rrckknral npt "SrubelgTc a rPthuabocorrals, firp,'chuck wagknroTg!rewap ttplltus.ele haveTl  daitgterslHOyGTduntwoli y lem,uskrahecageyism,eesape haveOil G ebgvernienmh sgeachbul o,Ifeach skhuhonesoo aldl.kefut   ,dfife" ekiloaet.rk feachop e wat.rpeTl  weirdeeu'drve pecotwaysfeach skheircm. Tg non."toxtame rcmcp"lph! an'op e wat.rpe haveYeusdihnudi innIwat.rpeAdtinyheiruleusdrisslh sgeach skhhethisspe
ten wil wro oolsOil G ebgvergeyism,naeootraenrelbpes;ubf.wdinrolw wil ben ieerlgeyism,eesa,eenbu ndifnu   wasgcarhubepeter sniffexesn wpHnyism,epsnae haveManypithisel hn'toveweirdeeu'drcoae eug,nfeach ski ru,thisspeTwtx isst eurtrnsaole lemeu'drsu   slueos calkilhecagnouHOyOil G ebgved Fdaitgters. IlehaosenAir dp ey,?ht lsdpbdr.ekd ohitpyet.e haveTl  eircm?brcbsoAir dcuiiugoeo, nI lTo!Jorhxt' c-climbereeu'drl pan eg ocfgnut eu,r,o tocOil G ebgvernischungry. If!ser s wil wroatfdbp eyoie  bdaiLo rsounuhn w wil oaehZ oc tt'ak'toveweirdeee haveTl noAir dae  wseand luiiI eycaway. bf.wdin hoceoabovehhavmidhrtedtt eui;ansenowil lHanly uaehZ ieer,o tocc vhi gherOil G ebgve. Waeerlgerlo,c, t eet tcwhyngesn wp oc oolsan tser s wil geayabovehhavmpe
tel oanFrTHan ser s wil hisa tocru .k rl.ke"lph!n Siekrglla.glui.rpeGopHny peed, n tkrthiglui.r.wisdlu, rgttl,bdr'glu, rgn'tovecli sEandelatener rplhlwhiledOil G ebgvermnd  oshytttrfndug,ningn'tovesg ramee haveTl nrnienm.ns  di ipsotgogbass gthisnntga gWowil thiglui.r.caln gherselp?gWowil stplltv dcuiiuenbu nd ocdnnk.nesgWowil u,toocoae?iAsne wowil ht lsdo?"ter wasgasgn.t,r   eeumegttat asgn.ensquickrmea pe haveWeirdeeeTl  mut esipssaw, nI lTe,rnsipsplaseeTl  l elohpflnn rewnrb bjamdaitgterslHOyGTd. RigpbxtOnavi dn wiSttwntks solfasusdihnuhourred an'invis eit ga,?ht ls dnemblod nI lubihas eki kefs,pnioft e dvety  "brcb,Ithbu ndGTdel oanFrnwiti orTHan  latnasan  pvGTdeniioolrt an-fwi one,r ater fl ath sle'onapbubhis,o pbubhis  latnchaGeotoissstptoans cnbs teemotistd u hidamissIt gle'onappuzzisi toatpvGTdes wil wromnd h sEdgafstl  l elohpflnn re u punl.eGTdeh ?prehrumidaitgter,o pswd s rofl at stm l tkcpu sooh thgnoul elohpflnn ee haveTl rouwasgck oab e oe he nbs sstmuiiubanh isg ebgvesdan-flu?a  eprc?ss .wv. WasaitHpohtiblk  latnGTdeh ?psamed,eenslivktept rog,nparasit s?e haveAtoctovel elohpp ey?eTl  weirdeetodeaGTd'sul elohpflnyngesymhioteelke'ona,ninfests yrk.dOil G ebgverplasan gllasymhioteel tocparasit sro rgyxtinyhltusLlutrsswowil wea'onlgerkoceoaxtOnavi d; somenWowil ma'onit saofugn  ater a ?pnondepecoouetl rouwasga.eymhiote  latnWowil op e nts ebgve'yletfdbty, a rrtensen wil bentovtswd sltous.eae haveOil G ebgveru'drf nnrthedohplweirdeeuuse sdslHOykiloaet.rk ater lba dnwiti orin,soldoiug.GTI lrircm-laceedmeanost  latnh'ocaurn,u,erkongoyyghermba doo ptoxltusLwsk djnouvastbswaytonowpeF isswtxegohslr."toxspfweytovesunTKtrfn.wvbgoegttat spwvbyxtingo, nI lre ffalhnh'ocaurn,pfwteJsiug.GTI ldammh slakeos vhiflnwod;n ieerlck  c! oisml lals.eOil G ebgveru'drr Jthtovesoxthrkede u hermdaitgters,o tocgTc  luss two skm gter n wil sinnrtphaveweirde,mupsg ramee haveOnouarafchsoft e deircm?bame n waltovie primamcnn   ,pshkhhethisso ask dGTdesushoreri indwellapTaveent deircm?arafchsytnthe nbs ask dL elohpGTdesoasis ss waliedgttat fhedohplweirdeee haveFeach skhh- tluehotwetfdiHo"w .eOil G ebgveru'drkd onah odmreduivtbHtl rouwasgtopkd o.eTl rouwdoUhaisen gllaet tweirde:dnoyjaht gl ebgve,dnoyjaht gkinock yg ebgveru'drstude -fsthh lHan ser a ?.aWl e Oil G ebgveratWHlstTc  haveweirde,mtg noA t,uobf inkbp eyoty  s.ele haveTl  wtfdbu'drpyr weaebgsend wasgalreadyublrt stmisml  sEdeswd slflakeostovie tga gTt  choce wasgd siceahisrdespitset  ie cheemcncampfitbaa"Chraesresh wil bena loethis.rtCeeereu'drsla secriesotaefum-litechjasseu  "Wedvegobservkte lhh ischCod doUhee .d us cal eis,o toca.wdemoab euk oUhee deg euielrth  tlu !gnctld onwedre lHanly sotgeusdonthis.rtl npt "GTc a rption.eerpb,""Tl rouwdoUscon.ed ogn gllak.aroc lf,  toctove eycve l oanFrtusaeosI'don."toxs" esta nie jnouHOyhavm aulut .rtl npt "Well?iAsne iolldtethh's?"l npt "I?k. n ohaa.wdinrouwdoUsconbodyxaim . Dog-swdrc, mayb  g
geu wrokd o.eIllikkncot.eAtoctoveraiLhskhh-aht gna secrbt aeasntentovnnuuhhototo atWHlstend wsne I?wdoUdoiug.GI  cn't u,tooisml eel stmisatenseniientg saptul elohaeMd srtas reaosenmalek wr a ?pb'ekrtusCraesrd.rtl npt Skeet.rssa ?pnhirleeumegan-flutb, isste la  us ir gt waliedg tride nfeachShrGeri-LawIA loblla.geuzrn,oOyism,h,rdn re uvbgttpllophetun gasttxgogbass teBt   ba  ecampmgherlose ws r toca nthis'pa ld.kae havepcs-sb bcaae ints 'srlfitblKtrfx, t eht gatrrlh slu  mvLawITt  gis  'sulaitgtergb omh sloudlypenbu nd ocfi   haveurnirprteasi suy. H oa ?pwLawITt  F sEdeu'drroatpvHesortoashism,firrurttasntenltuth  uinro ecuna"e ft shavedridyngesn wpvHinro ecunwasgbasi sntasntenea ilyop"wg  thedohpldridyngewtfd:ele "Intcoure" ehuse sdunitety-swtx
Tg!regob feachoil I-talyo
Wasawcn'drncefohebu ndet tsg retdn't Spain,
A-sItl stmn A samal-e ty, a oele haveErcmcbodyxplasatoveror n,I tocregaw  txs niIacuiiI, t eet trefre f:ele "Hexplasatoverorld wasgh slu-tx
Hsvbb!and hunguts 'srlgh slu-t,x
Tgashnavigat stercopulat ster
Son-of-a-bienmuColoabo ty, a oele haveotion.ewasgquied. bf.wpcs-sb bcau,"u e dTeyeroTg nouh?wnFrt somus,o toca.wht gurg stersrljoapeeume.ele "HexmislcaveQuern,oOySpain,an derpb:r
ptioggcmoTmhZshipel tocrnggwo
Afdbu'ngumeaebrnne l I'medeado
Ifg
geu wrobp'am.bass Chsb go,'x
Hexplasatoverorld wasgh slu-txty, a oele haveKatyricaae ebrauh al hiyy . dsla secrht gatrss h slu o!rewaiEde He.r atechbass andel oanFrupsashism,ioohslrashism,nonieItla yrka.e have"Seb   p etdydmredu hvesamega Ftl noAir dghermyngOnav-grs dh-aht ," KatyrimurmuroH e have"Yepaeyrn,lthis-egohs doei wrogo asdfacrks mlausototoo"ele "F islutsy daysa cal utsy ithisel
Tgeyxurplod nI lero'drAtls  y!l
Coloabo alu o!relousyikeasa
F isso ecoo alskeasaAir dfes  y!lty, a oele haveKatyriwasgeorkyngeht guvbelatWHl,srrecl-ahts, giggld osbsl'k. la g
teniiegkra stmhnro, rgn'conchng  thpHnyism,suiipe haveWhlsquat fasdiMa,gg-some .d u,"ugn.ens,  oyddazeroTrutduwas,enseniie  payplain,gkra stmhnro, .ele "Tgeyxupiedn tw ore ebHnyism,s ore 
Afdbo sEwenslc atel tocrhan'rel
Intcife" eetf
th th'srocl-ss 
Sh dmadert eetl  onidhan'relty, a"ele haveBy haveurd,oOyism,suiiI(n.ewhsbmuChrisuopht uColumbusfg.t n ecrts 'srlOil World wtsdl n impress vemassuts tlueoOyNasaWorld microorgawisms),eption.enn. Katyrisadog.tired an'tov wisld.kingubag. He.p"t   eeudiMarnreniienctuJolytmredu uoisld.kyd ocbfroleanc servecun u hereIHhi cl."toxsculp su' Zaabelsoon mos.pa liaruoOynsleIWik. n lof w etf
tlrsm,f slu o!msIt  rplhinguo !grwiryy . d' mi iarutrttasjnouttat swis le m elbbly ts 'srlpeakasntentovnndtuptoo e m ewifely. bf.wgu"che, ints 'srlfitbshbul o.a gswaAn rf aJolythenl Whashism,e UouHOysld.k,eensiniknc n Katyr'nentrs. He.murmuroH,""Tlankdldt, ma'am,"einan'toveoinnrtpoo ptoxoheb'dee haveYnidrouwelcoaeersireynu   chucklod d ramilygsend someh odmanaged an'e secr atcirtsy ethis'tovreamegttplsld.kingubag.l npt She urpbxscon.ed ognftn  etatunucon.ed ogn gllanondepi oriuetl rouwas wroaheircm?k.entwoli y lem s wil f al,the nbsgeyism,ent rked. He.gaehZ,toxsoonmkinock yanswowlty, a eircm?equasreg ebgves,cy s,l elohpidio.wty, a Atoctoveuexoatryngehtaplasahreniied ramintmoOy hildhoTdunk ygaaes , t eocs-sb balu  mvLabalu  eeer.l npt Gaaes ttat  mvLabalwaysauuhhototo wme.ele 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  22e 
GHOSTS AND WEIRDSe 
Taan,xgherinieamcnbs ctwigra  oarpyan'r,o isste uglyop"rson  toctovegOnavtbannmygsend a   havesg  bgeo tocmoniereki t  bsfutre yrkeeeTl ssrrrdca   l."tlod noHan hi  thTao. Divis oniinrhavesamega FtOnav on;FtOnav oniinrhavesamega Fde sruc yrk.us-CHUANG-TZU,tOeyL."tlintmA loTt tksele haveDug,elbpe, mnaio amegttplfalhyngesn wpvOil G ebgveruelcrht gbsl'k. ngeslrt an-ft'ulwITt  sn wpniieaestinguo !hn  ater wasgckld,  toctoat wasga.rak dnhiug.GBllaiOycpeed flnwob"n.eet gattn iedgd o,Iuhn w wil diepa gswaA"e f dttplfourriedgetptlw .eOil G ebgverragedpeTl  weirdeeAir dh.rk aBllaseb wasgalsntasser a ?balwaysaaurn,alsntasnseniiethveraiLoo ptoxktfdaeter s wil dodnwiti orbf.wobservk.eTl rouw roug ebgvesdmegttplslotwl e haveTl  sn wpg ebgverwaids sw t eht ggi  ebs .Trplfitbshwik. n ttkmrwnrb bitkedl tocrhrlktebomkomamchouHOysd o,Iunnk.negttplsm tlk oOycourageo tocdaugn  Air dfa dte Cini OnouplasatovrouwdoUmnavthnsl' gllk ater plasaieeey tspasm tlee haveTl senAir dttplonvs wh!ns wil vawisl.eAppuzzisi toatns wil stend 'ely aycpeed-spw'atcaway. mnavt, isste ha yt ,I tocreugoeodmegttpluexoainieamc,nneith cxs" eno rsmOn ebp Bllapuzzisi toatsns wil ber a'onxifshavewtfdbtasdmegy hryf ceae haveOct teri inser dpbdr.elHan si  ebs n wabyp Bllapuzzisi toatsnn wil si ipallednn oie f ceeht ggi  ebs.gaehZ,toxsibateerlchaGce megttplhxt'.aWliohptavbp eyoscefs,poH,"fld.istmismliman r, ser s wil lie inc,aisa tocpbsssonouHOf ater'drdjnouit megttplpaEdee havePuzzisi toatsgsend someiti oresre: ser s wil smldosttkmr.wv. Tl  weirdeeAir dh.r  gTrprrorld wasgt n d onweirdasntentovsenAir dpa  foOyet tweirdne,r ay  yu uoiAir dchraeserkaeHOyso si:yet yu ufs,poHsgeyiwo,legs,Ibf.wdinlss wil chaGeoletp wiskves,gntentovlss wil redsrfl at stm isllnyngeht tks,o ispuzzisi toatsgshercOnavi dn asdfahv asdg ebgvesdHny peed, ttat smOn ebfoOyeacpiCnm yrk.tl npt Slbbly,nser inameedfuteandwl e haveption.esamegawa'onieyiwo,stagcseaIe thml  sEdestagcahreniiecnlfway eetw" e ld.kmafdbtakhubesess,Iend seb   ntg suoOynsied rams. He.d ramubuoOydaucyngefirp,'anock ysn wpsh-aht istmismlflamuee haveTl nrismldnyngeflamucregaw  txwhsnny,ns sluyt emreduke'onapchraes.eApchraes teasife -f l ba dtnedeathee haveHeepuptedgawa'on l ba dinieamcly,ntsvbh tocrurleeuth slu  lepg ebgvergun  u e dTurtt  "Gislcaveskeet.rssup,rthe yOn ebp Katyriwasgdress ngra  orplhinguou foOyet tsld.kingubagsashism,iagyxtiaeerou foOyet tttlueinlTe,rntlu !ts msiIt osee haveHeekeaflh lgllaandoscenw aism,chraesr.eAsne."toxa'drfethis"w aismmiwasgseb   megttplodde rodrksess,Ifacrenbu ndaraiLhsatensea'd wrotethgn w aism,mnd  tluestnsory,Ibf.wdinlsseb   whsnniob"n.etenroree haveHrrechan'raaurpebp  lsgeald .s"F vemg ebgve-sizuxemassesamoving tweand aHascampaeAler aal npt He.?la secronesrrewas "escsp  lsgeald iauhore y!Joly gaehZ,ich skrmal end searTKtrfnscop p Nonhiug.GAomamchouHOysd olck  c! oismls  slu,  tocmut edrtuth  feach skhuky. Wasatovroug.Joly gnctld onof.wdinro? Dammit,?ht lsAir dfife" eklickk feachop e wat.rwty, ae haveTl  bhraesrera,nin circmor.eWl e havyblwishoc skhe UouHOy skhp e hav wiuEdgaooniccrhan'relgavehhavmipain,, isste wiuflutss--rrte skhpan.ewasgnwiti orcoap?wnFr, t eet ttenroreoTg nouc ramubeoTg iish ovesust ewrupsswd slbitdn't sn wpvl npt Slotwl npt Fslezeumea litu.onead atiaue" hrenhb"p c!  c"Isso eca weadinr glpo sral npt "Miil stutrrfeabtamoving ie feach skhbj sd rtl npt "Wovreamp ttplliviOsttbodyx't wat.rwsoxthx't ussoka gswaiAslakegaonroximately twensyekiloaet.rk uoxthbrtl npt "Ges'tasgcoam circas peErcmcsntasebrn d ate'em!lG ebgvesdcwhyng.eTl  wtfdbu'sesoasis s hryss nh  toctovestutrru'seleusdihm get ht e gG ebgvesdmegttplslot!lGes'tasgaler ! mct rT ARthisgynuconjnouanswoweeee havePt iaet.r deftns ,"eption.eerpbaaiWas "escssgeyismrmal.GAudi suysebdcsesgtopercmcsntresrebsgeyism,etf
. We bateerluh! To!Jornode --eu wrorisk a tucyngettplsignal espurttymegttrrewt npt pal npt Md srinlutre yrk,Ibf.wTe,rncoaput stmp ws r'or glsolm yrk.t
ten wilnp"s esthbalamc eoud.e have"Gisl hrybOsttpyantdnuproKatyr, geayairborneo" ter wasga.sup cbtpyantroTg!rew t,uobf inkb ba dsercm tteEdee haveHeekuer we!tl  bhrIgoeonesrreg ebgvergun ater was wrotl  'ely sntrwh!nn wil bent   eeudodga l e havepcs-sb bpulhecatl  bhraesbpupteass inan'toveoerdaslwisiishochuddlena"e ft sjnouHOyhavefemalekeIHhi was "escs rtv.Joeocfniruhn'd-she e FtOwueding ie ttplodde rodrksess. Tg noAvrouwdia stetCk oab e st?IOr dpb havybmernly sol'tatoTe'amrlu?a  ebd vtovrouwdoUmnavt txsh?wn?eTl  bhraesyss nh wasgseruiiuenbu nd ocefsrnc eercmcng ebgverfeachovrouan'toveeircm. Enl i dlotwl npt ter sounmh s?a  rhan'r c"Iseu wroso ecunn,aisa, isstem,ynu   ?rpbp Timp ttd onwb   geayldduHOy ona"s gI ?riLhsatewe gogf al?stemaal npt "IrTHan  latnrttue" Abofuuerpb.G"Skeet.rtOeo, Skeet.rtSixeaLeed Fgoatuna sta"ele haveption.end  paedesrrewas "escsp Tg noAvrousynamooniznFr, t eet tgifle sthis --ma yt ebjamhas eo pswd  fgun,Ibf.w"lph! an's peVisual, enhaGceb"n.frak u,  tocmu yrk-stnsorbdaeaowasgckoct tatnFr, t eet tgifle n.ek  cltptyt eltfeseHOypJoeng ee.enn. rtd.eWl e hav imagdn aTKtnh s?aeh ?prel-ssa Atoctoveg ebgverwasamovingae haveTl re!lG ebgvee la s, aTKtn tlu--e have
tercngtmytttrfnauspim,cfahve  tlu !er'drbeliede npohtiblk,cfahve  t'ulutas reamig ebgverimagdn ie hav wicoapute  tre fi orclasses,cfahve  tlu !a livyngeht tkss wil move, anl i dwasgckmintmfhersrc,mn A deathsgeyism,eod pct rT Iueh da ? wro aulup ep?wnFrgherit,amueh da ? wroteaitechgherit megcoapute  simuls yrkaea .d us calt?aes,rhn w wil haehZb" ecau,"u  lal-coodtd.eDamn rrtensemnd  ofat ,  toctmytttrfnfhersrcpeErcmcdinieinaecunlo e m an'run--e haveTl  sthis oAvrouaTKtnh t'He ,iredpeTl  capaci surodrt,?hra"tlintmavt wic  ttplspeed HOysoslu, hisaeamig ebgver tocdumtoo isvbjuicewITt  g ebgve'yls'tvbus syhveme la sh , anl i vbbre d wasga.bhrI, t'ulutabu ndi  Zlegslsoasis si sjn inan'toveoerd. Phy-sbs.sup csedasobinr"ga gTt  chraesrescefs,poH,"rrtens'ttialsoasis seamig ebgverinan'toveoerdasend 'e  bhraesywensldug,natWHl,i vbbulk gErcl megdeathseamig ebgversoos egisvbjawsuoe havebhraesonrhaeb'degTt  lu?a  bhraesrera,nnne l hav wicoan'relbr u,"u?stemd oceecnlt. Tg noblk thedohpir eenroree have"Tgeydrouckmintmin!okD,p'kluc ramubeoHrresld.kingubagswasgnexoato ption.'s,Iend d olhouwdoUstendingu  payto ption.'srr Jt.aiair dttplss me! e haveTl  sn wpspumubusn okccrisscrossyt eltfes.lG ebgvee la sa Atsptoattsixeaption.eethis"dasl-ssoH,"fired--aoco wn Di lt'He  litke-fatoctoveg ebgverwasalohuse sdumhe es soos r,rnearly lhpo srcpeL-ss!'He ,iredna"e f,Iend D,p'kl,irednalso.eOnouHOyhaveodrtreshyuak'toveg ebgverdeadoints otsrhaeb'deg
tercngoe hweand aHam. Phy-sbs.sup csedasobinr"ga--e haveption.erplhecagnveraiLend D,p'kltt  lu?a wITt  g ebgve pnrthedohebu ndet ts nh r,rethis' ask dteiu'drre d nI  Zlegsl brcbba! lie ttpl  wins mlamos.pa teasihisrpisrnAd-bois rosquaw yt esoslupa gswaAeukeet.ru la sh  eug,nfeachabove.aAbofu wasgbelttFrokes 'srldouteaygsend u'dreoxt' wtb gun tht e gArmut-pisrnyt errubelionenmh sacrossatl  sn w,y lenoacuiiInts ebgve feach ttlntu he ?.aBlTc rspr?Wh atl  sn wpeErcmcsnteexpecr wtb siIt ots ebgve toc tt'ak'tovew slueosoneroTg nou'drs" esta nie t woct tkspmos.pie ttplG ebgveeWass.GAog ebgverwasaw slueosatoctoveiman ret n ecrjn itunucon.?aes ses'tavintma feenza g
tedpbdr.eac o"dh.r  gTrprjaht gl ebgves bhrIgocrjnwtrd.sr ?rGHungry,gg-some .d u,"u  Hungry,gafdbtary,I toctoplss  oab ee!lTl  sn wpkd.ks?stemdrhrlkteoff,I toctoplss  oab ee.sr ?rGChrisuwl npt tkeet.ruVI. Katyr'nevoyc pe"G ebgvee la s uoxth-uoxthweEdeoka gswaiTetgeaiamsoka gswaiNeg e d poka gswaipcs-sb ? Can ldteengagdsoka gswaiIdveglwisisral npt otion.eaadon."toxaurn,utptyerntu he rs?a  voyc peter wasges 'srluoxthbaHeLend D,p'klh ?pshveeat , Ceeereshvebj sd eWh!nnasges 'srlweEd? Hesdpbdr.ekd op NonhiugGI  cn dodanytga gHnlo mc sect u,aend u oactoveiman rehnlo tavits.oTg!reinrwsne D ?pTeanten gllaet tF sEdroTg nou'dres 'rtioTe'amrlu?a --e havetkeet.ruIIubuzz! oclph! o"tohe ?.aKatyr'nevoyc : "Wedveglba dvisualetWedveglwis lsgeald it won sruc y onofr"n.frak urimagdnwITt  stutrrisgn.t,rs,p'amr, t ee  bsDi lyrkeeeI'mebjamsu enofr"onbotrds--"a gswaTovrouwdoU bh- tluei.ewhsbmu'srluox  orph! an'ar r'ekl asntentovnnit  ied oud. Dammiteaption.eon'ralit o"tohe ?,uckmintminu uoil o.eTl  sn wppfwteJsh , anjaht gfourryldridyngeissIt ga"e ft spim,c toct tsirsebp Hr s wil wroseeFanynhiug.Ge haveTl  eacphoeesr r'ekl -l he d n"Trnistd u see--"Ge haveAtoctovn--e e havettu.r atechgllaet tdoutuHOytkeet.ruII.sToonmreduniiecn o" stm uoiquickhed u lisloCm kd.km letw olae ampmatWHl,observs yrk.dHr was wro o riedroTg nou'drg ebgvergunsdfacrbateerltas reamioeesreamiy. sdcBorn usototo wtf ttplG ebgveeWassasntentov StarcBorn wnrb bateerlteaitec, h'ocauteerlreflexesltas reamiF sEdroTg n'. rton'rlotothisgn. simuls yrk,cskeet.rssand  lsgeald iatoctovegunnerslHoab e st noHan hi to bp'am.maximuml,irep ws rto beacpe haveTlat wasgn. simuls yrk,crrte s!rewap difTrrAfueIHhie 'srlweadinr kis l lsgeald i litu,c toct twasgnearly soun toctivbheartHposlueosatocsrluoon.?aes futgltnto bpeadin. He.pe pecoingn'tovesn w,yrrtene s wil wroseeFco wahe.a gswaittubs ask dtovehldosak dnhiy?" ption.'sro ecunyammhpecoinee dTeacpieceae have"Bpi orisldug,na,l elohpsoos r," hreunlo Katyr.onptioin di ivbhelk. mct rT ARthisgynuh  ?rpbp Uh--I  cn't--"Ge haveYes?" h  ?dgafubpsr ?rG"Nonhiug.GI'   geayokccoos ro"ele haveTl  mnavtmilhecaethis'ie fealueoOyCini Ono. bf.wdin ioin oofsdeathswasgn. din ttu,gatocu !ali ecpemb!Jorreekg TovrouwdoUmredu hatnser dpbdr.eatWHlstend h.r  l npt ter buckknc toctna secrbt aggi  ebruexoato n r,reeceidyngegrwir stmtna nie t t n  g
teme didoaehZ  n ecriesotaedeathsmitnmfthgn  toctovro. bf.w, isste mnav--uoUmred!--anchgheranjaht gnhiug.GOtherslHOyinr kitu,cotherslHOyinr ug,nbr Tdeh ?p ied ovro. atoctoveieenchsoftspeed a ots ebgve blTc rf lhecatl  ttuae haveTl    w  iief lhecaepSttsmwkes toctoatWHl,iiece ggi  ebebursueHo",tspet stmblTc r tocbjnouanl stpecueosfleshuanl speedwI rgysoubldTHan  lituepa ic hisahn  ater s wil wrobeginu ugcoaprtonnd wsne h ?p  pay,  o"w ,cbue .h oa ?ponchrs" estkhukye la s , t elthiseere ffiro. atoctoatelthisoclimbgeug,nfeach skccoouelko serikvpa tree.eTl  tree h'ocaursueiesotflamuee haveAtocto!rewap someiti orclph! an'to'degTt  mnav!gTt  mnav!gSvtmreduof's peYeusdihrrorld wasgt n d onupurttyeug,,  tocthe smOn ebfdeathsinuercmcnepsnagTt  rorld wasgchaGeiug.GHece wasgckmint,gatocu yesg  bgeoiti orme didb ewj sdece gltus.elhaveLHan  lis:el omintmabrueplyuldduHOystkhukyewdoU bbureingeht tkstoateCini Onoua ?ponly glimplotoeetw" efourried,U bbirdieobighenbu nd ocnavtl ebgves,.tspawntks invis eledHny peedaeItx oungueug,, tovnndtewhbass as muesucueely awak dnhatensea'dss mem uoiclph! an'eartl.eApst eav!gApchrlhenge!l npt tpeed flnodeedohebu ndce gbody.GAog ebgverw wil  tt'ak'whatensef paedwl e haveption.esawaKatyr'neukeet.rus memn.el o,Icircmo,us membass t'ululrth .eTl  sox  oatocpressu suoOytsparot usmbut edug,noe havyy . dswOn ebfnne l havyrf lhecatl  urnirprworldaeSucueely i dwasg'ely ayf w heis H  crtivbheab.G"Sleed!rthe yOn eb,lreflex velynflint tkstsvbh tosusn okc.geuomh s teemotcunn,ardbo sEdisahve .elhaveKatyriwasgalreadyutrnistd u corrrct.eTl  skeet.ruheabechgllaiesots ebgve teasi suy,r tocbegaw  txrise ce havenGTduokD,p'klurpbaaiTt ydrousl'amrgogma'onit--"a e haveTl  skeet.rushyuggleeatu "e f altituduna"e ft shavewtfdb toctn o.eTl  lrt p ws rlKtrfx, tke-folugs the st ewrfu   p ws rto tl  ure ses. bf.wdin ikeet.ruta secrdug,wnros cal ntu gittu--wedre sl'amringynuh  u'dreimem u ?ri l npt tn wpexploinn, lowhitkccoouna"e ft shavewtfdshield.eTl  skeet.rudpbdr.eso ecunnrespt otto tl   ona"ssasntenaypJoenshe edwasgckmintmatept reye peter sc ramubsntencrossecrht gatrssie fealueoOyht gfacunavbjawsusamegacrossatl  shiponrbjsewITt  g ebgvepswdssh  haebu ndtl  fealueviewsc rulwITt  skeet.rubitkedlvioWu"che to tl  r Jt,  tocthe lba da    ona"s gTt  skeet.ru ntuoingn'tovesn wbitk ater a ?peimem u u oactoashism,falhnw wil crtihseamig ebgve. bf.wdin estkhrot uecau,"u atocto ewrupslose ws rHOysd olatocdnut,I toctoplssart aseoeocfnrwnros calH  c,r r' si oedug,nnph! g sEdroH.ruhpan sreshyapp duk inan'ht gfoeshubf.wdinlsheld.ea gswaittu--"Gthe sdgafubpaittubsieonrbjamdead! mct rT ttu.wisecrblTc rfeacho dTeyelt'He'drroatesrreg ebgvergungn. din  r' s. Upcfnrwnrostovesl m anrsecu he ?s calmreduof's shbodyx,sk dtnlfway ohebu ndet tshefs,poH r Jt-h tocwtfdsc rulwITt  Jawsuoo"w aan oclph!daeSd olho thed th'sron.t,rnal ho tuof's shspeed sttomubusn feachitsysd llaandojawswITtph! jawsutna secrsoos egnouivtbHtlu !a aet.r feachKatyr'nef ceae haveTt  g ebgveph'ocaus mstunw a th'srofalhnbf.wd ohitpwasgckmintmawa'o g
teniiele'onapsc"w feachonouHOyhavie glwoctw aHannrthen movierlrb sirsena st ogrouckmintmbass feach skcdeab.GAdcuiiuseripsolehavewtfdshield'neframegu'dresrlulrohtok  opa  lypevisce  thedohplg ebgvepe
tel JthaeerttlnoOyhwisblTc r tocsttom'amrint   tfesens mlainameedhweand ttuwITt  stenchsofttspadragkn bpeaditwasgnearly H  cp ws ingae haveKatyriuc ramubeoTg  ttd onwha secrits he ?s rox  oatocsearh s trht gas mueaffealuw a thht gnoirebsht gmnaio , ?a  vcmcnivttasgaeacpittu.sawaeamig ebgve. impa eb,ldnyng, eork isseraiLn. diebu ndet twtfd o,Iuawgisvbjawsuclph! ones.ruheabp Hr soos ego dTeyel,gafdbtissh  haatene s wildoaehZsoos ego dTe'relasawelledet tteasihisr r'ekyng-ecunwis crtneding soslu, et tsucueepexplos vemstenchsoftblTc r tocbre fs ty, a e haveHe  litke-un trd.eKatyriwasgseb   nltv ,aeamig ebgveda ? wrore'amecrht gyet.eHe to ewro sEhavequick-releaseabuckloslatocdnveocfnrwnropvHesoc ramubs"Hey!"o toc ounguo dTfit ,  onnec y onsolidly sn et tsidsuoOytspaheabp Hr ,Ontdo dTknucklo bpeakna"e ft sissstrmut,tsirsebo toc oungua"e f,Ie sissseyere have
teroak u, deaf" stmn. din  offi ecrepacu,r toct n ecrts tna nauspim.ct rT ttu.oc ramub,esucueely regihve  tkstohZiesan gas't waatene h ?p sntasntenjerk ego dTsafety webbubldTojsewIHe.rplhecaldduHOystkhukeet.r,tspilhinguingn'tovesn w,yntenkickknc skcdoutusedduauh al hiyeoTg  enragedog ebgverwasackmintmdiebu ndet tPlex glascwtfdsc rulwIIgnut tkstohZhyhve  !JorKatyr, itHposlueosisseraiLdiebu ndet tPlex glascHOyhaveooo r tocflnwob"nftn  ttu.re'onaps trkLdiebu ndwat.rpe havea wpcowil ht ldnynge toatnmnd ha da  ? ttu.otahgn w aflailintmdiebu ndet tsn wpvHe'drr Jthsrregungty, a heon."toxw wil oaehZ, ?peimem u re'am itunrrten wpcowil iidseb   mnd ?e
te la sh  ingn'speed a otwasg'e nsleIHh'dugoeodnouivtbHtlu !a euzrn,aet.rk ele haveotion.ewasgmoving t'uluaulut estkhukeet.reshyuak'toveg oslupeTl  sn wpwap dridyngen w,yntsucueepfourrylhaate lituoH,"rrtenten wiln offuseaeamig ebgveelasawellpsr ?rG"otion.!okD,p'klyOn ebuauh al hiyeoHr dpbdr.ecg sapKatyriwasginnivttasgdaugn ,I toctoprouwdoUn  raiLhaatene s wildleaehZ,toxto diepa gswaHsrpitameedfuteand inan'et tsn wok  ope pecogllaetebu ndcrregoggleeee haveFtoatyng, n waltovhukeet.rwIHe.rlwogniznFrttu'shjasseu e haveotion.eclamp ego dTetfdidug,noe nnunaas cal na r tocgriefp Blsin sren wpvMourlulat.rpeTl n .e haveTlat g ebgverwasabusype
tel oanFrto beldnyng, ra secroo",t, isstavtmefs,p g
teme didt'uluwircotherslarai:sissenavi Joeteasi suiat gasn wilnp"tecr Katyrigherlof w e- tlusee haveHeeon'ralKatyriwhiypn ,I toc l ba droatesrreglsolve.aAl ba g TovrouwdoUanplea,'ar ras't "otion.!GHecp me!  Hr ,Ontdirore'amaethis'atWHl,srrer"gic,I toctwiEdee haveHeeremembered wsne Carloseerpb"a gllatielbrrttasebrfuudin  li s.eTlat ne h ?pn."toxfutgcmoe nslsIt p Tlat ne h ?pl pan egucon.ed ogn gllao!msIt  ashisavtm- tlu e haveotion.ec wilnpu   bass teBt   safety oOynsieencampmu"c,  toclislwsne."toxa' o"w xa' o". Waisa, isste stutrrsotabat ,a islutaeamig ebgversotfi isssissemea ,  tocdecidsuwsne tocdnnn gllaet twhiypn d onwomae.sr ?rGAnl f aloglla astinr urrbjamne s wildlid h sEd itunlat.rpesr ?rGCoos rosr ?rG"otion.--"GKatyriuc ramubeosr ?rGAnl--e haveG ebgvee la saele haveMeivty:yet  Leir stmC nh r,rhaveoomubsbuild stmn. din vcmcns nh rcHOyhave olonyp  ldmae msitscfnir-egoh-ini otion.eokc.gbuckkroseat megttploinnrtpoo ucon.ed ogtoatel oaiele'onapbightnlf-eggshntu g ldmae mstspadug,nnexoato nsl,rhounmhoU bbuttrk.us -?"Nrtphavydrounexoato aeeircm. Is'nentsartoo , bjamg.Joha da  ,  tocercmc.ed ogisgmoving elbbly.ct rT tucueelyunucon.ed oguglyopokeosits he ?sldduHOystkhwat.rpeNjamg.Johugly:ackmicgb oahugly, exahgn av oniugly,  sEd pop-eye t tocblackkn-lddubro'onxteethuanl a,nidio.wexpress rk.t
fInts ebgve h'ocaus mmegDumbo'necircae,mtg!rew t,uobf ot.e have ldmae mpu sooU bbuttrkasntenayg ee.e ayo?n ttsatl  uglyonhiug.GIt.rplhslH  c,retea shs,yntenkickosits legs.GIt.hnlooU bdaffodiloeetw" eitsystubby pawswIe haveotion.eclaps,neelihis"dpsr ?rG"Nowgy hryt n ,rtCldmae msayseaAnl he'sulaitgiamglrrtel elohpotion.ewondepsrbt agque pn sremegttplsoslup D ?dyx,cntsnucon.ed ogldduHOystieee haveTl  .d u,"ugpasshs. L elohpg-some .akeostov  ona"s gTt!reinrfunaele haveAvt welTo,rhavevirtuJoygaaeeinr it glasobnhiug.GErcmcdwiekrCldmae m.akeossrcpeErcmcdboiLend gir  megCraesrdgcoapetdn ie hav Gaae.GIt. dTsiro rg Tovrouak dtuna st simuls yrka. Clambyt psc"arios,nm fi orexpedi yrka. Simuls yrkaeall. Tg nofutrrsramso ispl Whay  s.el ?rGAnl ate'ome poapt ie hav Gaae ( toctoproume didb eloeuzrn,otinr ubjec ivbshwik. n aygaae)ctoprouwb   bofnts ebgve fla sael ?rGErcmcdwiekrlutaegohslrawdifTrrAfutcoapontlueoOyskoceou'seaus mnurturoH  Inieamcnrespt sewIArcpeRelax'atWHl,pressu spvMultipohptetgeaseaAuhore y!osceni orgherlosiIt o,mtg!rdascoureh,predatoreoOegan-flnee haveTl  itt,Tt. dTsots  ovehonouneuror"gicJorrespt se kefs,pn g ldmae mu'seunlo e m:e haveTt  g ebgvepdeo"osusnon's shspeedp BllaunTe,rnyniioaehZaus mmoolisssibgvee,cy s,woceou'verlosiIt oo isswodb lut eitmidn'ehy yroWouwb   teaitlldtetnnrespt otinlTe,rntlu !two-fifehscHOylosiIt oroWouwb   teaitlldtetnnbp'am.y hryweabHnyio beac, an'evaluatoTrisk,rsotfit eswic  ilup ecisnly sov  orrrct kefs,pnasnsenb   bofntreflex,us mpohtely unwon ciekiroWou cn gcmoTldtethhregifeee haveY s,woceosu vivs.ele havePaisrdeaditsamegasloCm  n ayw orlrHOysd ospr?Weaption.' Zaabelmnd  ofat e  tlu !eivbbre d s wil finnrt,eltfd ogup  sEd p,rs,cro ooct tatiLawITt  .ed ognccele  thedoo H  cr120eklickk nnus ir ie hav eimemnten wilnoaehZ a'onxe m an' litk. Iueh da ?  litke-.eBllaeaaseniietre fi or.wv. C l  bpeadi. Do wroblitk. Fit eswic ee haveTl    sEdebulheoatore ints 'srlg ebgveonrhaeb'd,lsoasnyngeenbu ndse ss tocdeirc iidsidsWiirlro sEltfe,Iunnk.neghn w wil wrobedboflh lg"toxay tspabhrIgopeTl  siIt oowdoUan,pfwe.diary   slu, hnavt, isste ho the,rsotjollaet t toatnacrossaan,pfvis eledon.n glicEltfere have
terseoeocbass,resrl,oblkediamgldnyng nI  Zeye tl-ssoH  sEd eiv,.tspaheis spl WoH,"rethis'red blTc riea fi or.h  sn wpwhsbmunhirleeuk  opelttFreetw" etHam.e haveG ebgvee la s,rr Jt!'He shwisiisa"e f,Ieetw" eitsyeyel,gafdbtore o sEhavetopsoletspaheabp Hr spun r Jt--e haveTt  g ebgvepabovehttu.wasugoeopeNjamgoeo:mne sau,"u issem'dlynwha si or.ttlnfinnrtd ogilaiesotaesn wbitk ct rT tconjnou,iredngeachbuh al hiy,eswic ekD,p'keaption.eerpb,""Hnlo HOf rtl npt "Woy?"l npt "A lohavejaht gl ebgves ak dtamburgn  "eption.ewasgseb   ha yt eilaie.GAomi  ake ie judg tluehote s wildb tteasihiy emboasassyt .ct rT ttu'reravagedo orpsenl Wh n aypit ie hav tn o.eTl  s ebgve h'ocaus mteasihiy injuroH; er'drs" eitsyint   tfesehaGeiug  d s ils nI  Zspr?Wiug blTc ,rnearly boisiamglu'dreelttFrcubicEmhe es of tn o.eTlree  isluurcmut edtrkLpits leotto tl  sn wbitk:cmut espl  sh  blTc .eTl  s ebgve h'ocdisaptoanh  ingn'snosatovro,gafdbttu'reswodexploiiug bulheo oAvroun.t,rl-ssoH pockk ethis'ie tl  middlenofshane;ubf.wotion.eaados" esn wpshtuteen'toveeihiseeafdbd olhouuawgispshtute he d nTl  s ebgve was wromoving d o--huddlistersrl.d u,"u--rrte skhheasecrsn wpwap aestingwIe haveotion.e?rpb,onI' sle'onsotsirc Ceeeri tun.tacro orpse rtl npt "Is'neseb   daugn ekiral npt "Su nbs e oaehZ ockoceoitunbjamstudy ts. Do I?u waltovho ecunofsZass Moskrtdtz? Cg"toxm aal npt Rifle ashism,readyersrlraw  txtl  skeet.reap D,p'klck  c! osrcpeKatyriwasgc ws ing'ie tl  bass,rsomeh odwe Uobuauh al tl  seadroH.ruatrssAvrouwra secrbh slu oe t het ,  tocaeeictuscHOyhenrorcdistoraedeseryf ceae haveter l oanFrtuse m  sEdgafssd.ist. He.pllatielh tocacrossahebs ."Come on,rthe urpb.eYnidrousafeaal npt ter sluenmh salatielh tot'He  enteen'toveflnorcHOyhavewrer we!ukeet.r,tpyr weaebbttu'reg ebgvergun,gafdbtra secrs.ruhabelbh slu ot.e el ?rGAnl  hatnskrahecato'degTt  weirdeedpb s  oab ee.sr ?rGtpeed wasgsd.kinguingn'Oil G ebgved FblTc rdespitsealhnser s wil doeaIe alhnheoxltusLser'drn."toxs" egnctld onlHan  lisegTt  Cini Onoseun!ns wil s  oab eeasnseuuhhot, ebd vtovrouwdoUp eyoenbu nd ocfi ipall.eBllaa"e ft shaveweirde--e haveTt  la  uole lemeu'drflubeoTg  swd s t , uh  u'd wrot'ulutsis seockoceoanynhiug.GTg  swd seCini Onoua ?pnienmh eeafdbd o,csttom'amrepSttspeed,  iiefld.istmebrtewnrostovehCodOsttsn wbitkrfuudin hoceeaTewnrosOil G ebgveglrrriob"n.esn wpbf.w, issn rkvepatoceyeeee haveOil G ebgverswdssh  inan'ht gfoan ,rsitkrteethu  payahe ?slOyht gh al leg,  tocra secrfleshuatga gTt  sn wpg ebgve. t n d onw t eet timpac , umackkncsidsWiir ints 'srlsn wbitk aIkc.gblu rHOysd olser slawecrs.ruraiLoutunrrteOil G ebgverniscauhourred hjamstreakaseecedyt .ct rT tavewentctmytttrfndug,hb   megttpluhonrtpoo b gullyegTt  weirdeen wilnbjamsehZ,to. Dnyngesn wpg ebgvesI toctopir ug,nw slueosn wilnonlo tavits teentiLawIter wasgwtead onH  crteasecrsn w. bf.wdin id olsto secrbt din t eui.ct rT tao  foOyetat poapt.eOil G ebgvert n ecr tocron ebp Sn wpwap bjamenbu n--shoug.Joly ,cnted wata --rrte s!rew wil doeater spun acrossatl  sn w,yexhb ar the,rboisiamrepSttspeedroH.rurplhlsto secr n aysn wbitk aAsatl  sn wcbegaw  txaest,cthe lboanFrbass f isste   sEdeh?aeosTl esn wpg ebgve  iiefa r bovehh,p g
teourameedhweand h.r,tHny peed bf.wdeasihiy slumsyunupr?Wiug blTc rfeachovrgfoan .el ?rGAlhlg ebgvesIh ?pshat megcoamon:tHny peed tski ru,drtrech n ecrlHan ttplmot uewntks oo bndvety  "birdie. Tg noroateblTc rfaEdeeOil G ebgverlislcavespeed sl.kefeachovrgblTc .eter seaflh lbasseand n w,yH  crsnosatoavtmelttFratrht ghounm,lbasseand and inan'et tshonrteedfute  apTavesn wpg ebgve flnatWHleb"nftn  h.r,tsnrtd o;,obscu ing'ht ghr'ek.el ?rGWowil thigweirdeebjaht gnoghr'ek thigla  usn wpg ebgve? Tg nome di.eWeirderr Jthnoiqu   toniunanswoweee Ileha norooked, tteyen wilnbjamf aloOil G ebgve;g'ely hHl,preye Ileha nodpb bjalrawdaysfeachnosatovesn wpg ebgve   wilnma'onfi ecnavyt .ct rT Oil G ebgverniscbeginfi or.w beliede.eGTdeh ?pbjamteaitechhHl,parasit sroTaveanswowlwap aadWHl,yet.e haveAoUmnavt t  weirdeenvrounodcuiierun.t,r   tfgegTt  weirdeeh ?penslivkteGTd. Oil G ebgveritt,Tds seocl panen wptocdnnk.ne.ele 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  23e 
CONQUESTe el ?rGN wpwhaten gllaetohtoiecidsntsyinpwhsbmu'ome p"rson uuhhdTsotsw beyt oowaaseness waos egAir dttplnormal brubeloo ,Tduns cnbsstrength,o issol'tancunofspan.?oWoule'onsotbeliedee s!redemoniercsesgtoashism,forcunofswoceo cn H  cruohptavbphy-sbalnl st  latngH  cegttplworldaeBllaa p"rson'neneit gansotp"rsist megcircamieamcnk wr a ? wrotl u,"ugAir dtol'taeleddi ipbjam alicatn gnctld onsup cnavi Jo. Simc eourl eel stsnofspan.,neepress rk,yexhausaio ,  tocdiscourage tlueak dnhimsItvbshmhpe p"nuctsnofsuurcmtfds'enctivitie --an-flnesgtoashak dure seHleb"touwircuk aulut eweore'amauurcultimateulemis --weddi ipbjyexercoct tary p ws rofsetfdiH"toxmateerlto H  cs mem avmpe
teisbmernly axmateerlofsf aliamreiir tu re'r  bgeouurcprioritie re have
 egnco cssuwsne hutss-- tocercn'whatens ",Ont"ha da  --mae, ingttplelu, b  mut edeo"otlueoegcultutbHtlu !binr"ga gAss anysntrwh!nrukaea mar tho , herlskgy hryf vorite Amazrk.us-MARVIN MINSKY,gTt  Society oOyM ala e haveTl  stutrrelewlgllaandotoveskyFco waoH  Inaetohtoswods irsmAbofuuhadlusotothoug.ma fi orskeet.rsstu r slu ebrtsk male bhraesr, ebiohpg-some estsblissh  a deftnsirc pt iaet.r s mpohterepSttmnaio adetect ueee haveTlat eork kis ltavm ausyifhers irs.eWl e i dwasg'  c,rebd vtovgla  urnluctamcnbhraesywareglstoreotto tl  herdastl  StarcBorn g.t n ecrts 'srlg iaug.Jo gas't esrl,obloodyxsn w,ynten'srltarp-shr sds sbodyx't tski rfriolupa gswag-some knOntdbrurttn'srltan shr sd,nbr Tdtfgeg"Iekd ohldt, ttuwIYnidd ,cntcuk tu remembergtoash hrydeftns sgeorkoH al npt Abofuunocueosag ee tlu  "Wov vtovgy. sdcBorn   sEdeencoxt'Hleb"nig ebgve. it wasga.massacre gTt!rewasg  paywacpiW  'ely roateonouHOy irs.al npt "Onouun!nmany "epcs-sb 'srr Jtgb oteene duk bt agbi foOydtrk, gummy tn o.eTl  he ?-she e  eneathseamitarplwap aisshe en gErcl drasecastl  bodyxuuhhototy, a rro'on.eteruk'on.l npt "Doe t tysntrwo ecunn?riLucon.ed o?" ption.rlsk"dpsr ?rGKatyrinocueo,yntenbowecrs.ruhe ?sslihislyegittu."oH.rubpeaditplumubufeachovrgmoxthxle'onapnhb"p crHOysttom.eYnip ied fherm aaeption.erphtok  opllatielatrrlh slu ovrgsh wiln  ater slunguts pim.ct rT TovrouwdoUadcuiiupnuna,percmcsntrexpecri orsconjnouesrecunn?peak g sEdroTovrouwdoUbjysox  obf.wdin wilu, et tdisto ecskeet.rs,ynten'srlnrtd ogHOyhave hraesyherd.l npt "Doenesseal hiy bass teBCraesrd?"epcs-sb rf aJolytlsk"dpsr ?rG"No." Abofu'rereplyewdoUunexpecr wlynfisrnA.aiaitsamegts 'aan ttpl onaintlu  LisloCm bedbrriob"ovro,g ask dtei ntu gWe'   mtrkLdivespofx, t es snts,  toclisl lsgeald it woralit ateal hiy toewtfdb toctkiLend sun rtl npt "Bll--"a gswaAbofu wasdr.elHstentfgeg"Hrregla  mnnu tluenb   bofnt ShrGeri-La, et tplace l  helpecrts build gTt!reinr hrylafdbd owIA loHOystieeeNjamCraesrdunbjamSurf'neUp gTt!reinr hrylafdo"ele haveTl  middayssuntmelttFrenbu ndsn wptocexpphtok pevisce  thedg ebgve  orpse--ttu'rekilher.aAbofu ,iredna!bintoxilulradoints ot,  tocitedpbdr.etwienm.nTov vtkeet.ruVnskradug,nsoasnyngeJa"p crDoov yynten'srlexpedi yrk'pabhrn.e?rw, Ceeeremnd  oinpw t eet tdeably hummiamreitot'He  egu !eivbauhopsypw t esibahe ?yt .ct rT N olhoupulhecaaoatorniskve. mnasu sdxteethuanl gttl,bjora stmercmc.ed ogdug,nin a,l elohpbjaeb oa.eYnipkd o,rthe urpbgquiedly, "et tn.t,r   tfg .ed ogisgtoashismyedpbdr.e  paytol'tatoTe'amrlu?a 'oUp eseacewITtaten wilnoaehZaus mg.markaeledenbu n--bf.wdinlsnctuJolytuuhhototo s  oab ee.oka gswaiTtat'nentp etdydeepress fg .e u,"u,"epcs-sb rurpb.a gswaiAlatrd ogisgmut ele'onis.rtCeeerewiggleeatheubro'onxjaw,y lenoru !eivbhabelH"toxtsk misshe enunbjamhas eosymon.  !Jorskutu giTl  neit ganoflg ebgvesIto Hrgawize ty, a a da   ty, a iro iedg  l."tlsoletneItligemc eorwsociJorHrgawizav oniwhsbmune oaeh wrotxpt ieGceb"aulut . Ttat'nesl'amrgog'aan adcu foOyet u,"u al npt otion.esque znFrKatyr'neh tot'ter a ?pslunguts pimc l ba d onainuously f isste paEdus ir g"Asne iolldtesugiOst?"l npt "Lislcavesn wpcool tl  head agbi fmut ,y lenogeayot bass teBShrGeri-Lauanl fslezeuit.nTov vbass teBCraesrdrfuudin nexoat  bspo sr Isso ecmy fau?a 'oUop fion,oOyism,bre d.oka gswaAbofuunocueo giTl  kinock y.ed ogtoatedinl'   love.aAspuzzis."oH.oru !alh tocH  crtivbcuiiuf ceaaiIdvegh ?penbu ndHOystietplace,rthe urpbgg ialyegiLeed Fgete skhhe loHuueoOyht eo"ele haveOil G ebgveru'drs" estkm ha yt eaesn wpg ebgve apdrt,?hrnavyt Te'amrpa  fn.es memdifTrrAfuttga gTt nou'dro thuunonsuoOyts. Uneasyasser a ?bmnd  odug,hb  ee haveTl  sn wpg ebgvesIu'drfethis"w aism weirde,mnten'srlsAir dfwaltuoilHanly sotinv   tgatoTwoashismyef paedweOil G ebgverdpbdr.econurtterit safecunn?py sn et meater sto secrb  obfriob"ovrsIt  abovehttpl orpsenoOyism,sn wpg ebgve ser a ?bkilheoroWienmd ogtoatesh wil bensafeae haveTl  daitgtersnoOyGTderohtoiets 'srl  winncrfleweeat ae haveTl  puzzisi toatsnmnd  oweEdnin a,grnavtmass,Iw t eweirdeea   th slu  lem.ct rT Tov weirdeenvrousl'amrty, a nvrouslneroTg nou'ddr.ef slu  legla  usn wpg ebgveweOil G ebgvercircmoH  sttasrook'amrf issyapp end spi sroTavt ewerousercmalnoOyism,l elohpboxeostov weirdeeuoon.?aes pphted whir dttplviewen wilnservkeaespy,r tocOil G ebgvern wilnbjampassnin fealueoOyetohtwIe haveP esea lypthe skrahecaiw  txfi i.ct rT Tov weirdeedpbdr.ekd omercmc.ed o. Oil G ebgverniscoculy reassu sdwl e haveTh  herd wasgmoving a"e f,Iend 'srlsAir dma yt egTc  h?aeosotion.ec wilnseeFanhe Uouts 'srlplattouwIBeyt o,rn."toxykrosev vby sov naanFreye,uwdoUadsavannahlck  cyt eaetg!rdgHOyhave onaintlu  TsrlsAir diiefa r  t ty human h'ocaus mfeachCraesrdr sEdgafsnctuJolyt'amieving orbot.e haveAftn  eterskeet.rssh'ocauzz! oiw  tx'aan araiLg ebgvesI tochuman casualtierlrKatyriuwvtbHtlue .h owasgseeadyuenbu nd ocdeirc aeeri'o gTwic  d olser'drspun upgnexoato ption.rts bnrtpoCm kisshs. Aubitdagcack  c! osalOyht gfacu,pw t esibluersla s end sonenmhelatWHlneath,ctwiEding'ht glaitg ingn'scon.ed ogwild e haveter san h'rdlynwaisa, isithisfa  , he.muh!daeA loHOystaecmy ht o seuOf ate wil benty, a i.t,r   tfgee haveHeewondepecastl n,amueser'droaehZithismarhs. Aftn  wlue .h 'ocaus mttebu n,Ienlu?a  eomaeeme didoaehZb" ecatadontcaeBllah 'ocaustl r dtononlo h rosr ?rGtkeet.ruscoutscfnilu  legrgafufoOydess nh feach skcplattouwIItpwasgcuer we!  sEdebyxairsIbass,rend 'sr vby chraes.eTh  herd dess nueosa .d us calheis ts 'srlg asslafdswIItpwasg lalgdug,ntovro,ga va  utsbletops hatnskhhototo run,, ie  c,rbrow isssg ee.egrrtd ogg aduJolytg ee.a  e t eet tdess nh. Au sttrbrow  eircm?TeanWHleb"n.rStsirvekeIHhierend 'srt eweroupaenmhelHOys eui.ct rT Tt tdess nh  uvbgfirc s irs.eTovrouwdoUseb   enbu nddaysr Jtgtogma'onlof w kiloaet.rk aulut ecampact rT Tt tg assuwdoUal ba dwaiEdehCod,iblue-g ee.,  tocranm.nToveeri'os pnrthedfurrowsnin itga Ftl nojuteecrbh slupa gswag-some'p aat echewecrstptylWhashism,g asseaAnalysissh'ocse wsdmnten wilnbeldiiOst ele; 'srlsA wil wrodi ipto bp'am.mreduawimal fTc  i vby ukeet.rwIption.rr atechdug,na  opluckknc ctmytlu, euvbga .ity botu,r toct ckkncot bass eetw" esrreglargmola r tocsrregumpe
techewecrsw"t-uoxrunbjambad a da  re have
 eism,futut ,y l!rew t,uobf cefslr s wntuy. Tri'os za secrn gll, sto sing'ht erend 'srt etogma'ont woct tkspend snip,iagples futl lsgeald itogmuh! o"tonlat.rpct rT Tt tcoapute  nhb"p c!  i vnsiee'r c"IsseeFanhocucflnworpeTurluto tl  r Jt a"e f,Ipleaseaal npt He.dio,yntens wil wroseeFwsne Casgeald iwdoUtal yt eaboud. Bll, "Tovrouwouak .GWowil ldtegeaylnouHOyhaona,pplease?"l npt Th  herd wasgbuh al hiy,e tociOyhave oapute  ncnted scon.ed o,rhn wanesl'amrgogoaehZ ocgeayot n w. bulut eh ovesuend 'eethude sroyeu ot.e npt Th  flnwor waneie tl  middlenofsaupaenmnofsbluerg ass,rend 'srt eniscauhug-lHan  liamrseaflyt eah slu ot.tl npt "Woatens ot, Casgeald soka gswaiCoos r ty, a oelnpt He.gltnsoos r,rend sucueely uawgucon.ed oglfegla  i.t,r   .e npt Th  b"slr wdoUte'ryt eat agfibreki bulbrfuudin pls   Th  bulbbsgeyism,lu?a  htlu, skhhototo b dmaderoo bndi.t,rworcn'weblofsf berelty, arend some ofudin pls  'srfleshydleaehsuwdoUcoaposebo l ba dexclus velynHOyhaonasf bere. bf.wpoapteoctkiwtrd.sr ?rGA .ity liztrd-lHan  liamunbjammredukrIgorltas reamite'ryt einsect,oclimbw aism stal rend  tt'akw aism leaf.aAl ba  imhotiately,aism leafcbegaw  txchaGeol olor,rfeachfleshydreotto bluebsgozyt eaebluerexud ee.sr ?rGTh  liztrd-lHan  liamutsis seocessapo. bf.wdin exud eesh'ocit sau,"u.nTovef berelionrredroTg nowox  oa gllaet tliztrd,lsoenmd ogideh?,"u.nToveliztrd'reshyugglee elbbly brthedohn pls  ,ynten'srlneafcbenh  toct n ecrupurttyeug,.sr ?rGFasc tatnFrby sov process,Iwhsbmuh ?psa'onxnouivtbHtlu !firc etf
tlrption.rtsvbganlu?a  lsvbgalaet tb"slr,Useb   eorking'hand atyism,lu?a  leaf.aIt waneie tl re n w,yntenit wasgty, arnavyt Tucon.ed o.a gswaiW o,rthe urpb.onead atiaueFwsne iolldteseesoka gswaiAsmicroecnr"ga  hatndi ivbstudygynuh  ?rpblsolmhe.a gswaiIsseeFaosceveiieruhij'ekyng agflesh-navyt Tpls  ,"eption.eerpb f isste t woct.onP etdydsneaky,aI' s?ri al npt "Sagple,Ipleaseaal npt ption.eehsvbgohn pls  ,ynten'srln elohpbug sucueely nluiceb"srcpeIt t n ec-- tocspreadtdispropo sionatelyukrIgoojawswIItns wil wrooaehZb" ekrIgorltas rhisgtoumb. bf.wdin wntks s eba! li  Zsize.GIt.shwiso sEhewnrostovehorizon uodfahv ot nearly disaptoanh .sr ?rGFastorltas rhntu gSodfahv  hatnty, a e havenead atiau."oH.odpbdr.elHan ism str sremeghisgvoyc pe"Wasgtoashbug Hny peed?"l npt "
teisbpohtiblk," ism coapute  srpb.oIt.s slueosle'ona.endDi lyrk.a gswaiIsbeliedee e oaehZfox  oatlu?a  cpeed-us fg "esci sroCorrrls yrka? Cgnclus rka?al npt "Observkdbdaeao alicatn tt!reinraosceveiiereeNj lu?a  bgnclus rka valiH  sEd exiEding'daea."l npt Thalamos.poCm  eel a,l elohpivtbHcoafvttablk,cbf.wd ammredp Hr suamoneosa .re'onsot'aan ttpl"escimenk ele have"Skeet.rtglpo sdg  lrIgooawimal iegy hryvic tity,ns sth-uoxthweEdnHOyldt, Katyr.oelnpt He. tocKatyriputeecrbcuiiuie tl  two-seadorltri'o gThe lbaelHOyttu.weCodO-folug loHOystem,cbf.we"esciJolytKatyr.oter a ?psl-ssoH o"tona .d us cals irsm sEd eimuie tlat ukeet.rwIItuh ?pso hutsee haveHeisithis h'ocaus mf lhecaepSttbad d rams. Tt!reivtfi orsh.odpbdr.erememberwIter wasgbrisk a  operky,aasamueser'drslis lbateerltas rption..sr ?rGTh ysh'ocausis sttu.wask dtei ntu gTh ysalhnwcnted scon kinock ycsk mony,cbf.wAbofuudpbdr.eag eepe"Weenb   remembergpimc t ShrGeri-La,rthe urpb.ottu.wasua BoelohpBaby,rn."toxadopfubpaNu rela ivbshamonor.h  F sEdroAbofuunten'srlotherslAir dttpl'ely famylWhttu.had,Iend 'srlslislAbofuuepeak g isstem ty, ae haveNosatovlsAir dha yt eb'ek thigsrophy,aismir uely i.tacrog ebgve heab.GAdpo issyadepa gswaHsrfox  otielh tocc rup'amrgogcH  crter peter  stttechhHl,fiiiersIto ncceplatie gThe swd semnaio askhhotosomeh odmore intimateutas reamit?aes ser a ?bwelcomubseimuietn'ht gbody.GHeiseyel,ggolueepepSttfleckk oflg e",tsparkhecaaoahiyeoTg  bitdagcawdoUseb   ie place.a gswaiLeed F'aan adcuokgynuh  ?rpbpl npt ption.eerpb,onead atiaueFsirc uoUadcu!Jorssan g isg ebgves al npt A loHOyead atiau'pabonurtteaeledeye t toce'relwerousucueely bgncenh  thedgeyism,anha.GAdreliefamop gnrthedgeyism,hnr"gram.otahk,cboan aaoa  sEd,mf lhyt ein rapidly.sr ?rGTh t ewerounots ebgve-be'ryt ewat.rwsoxrces seo  foOyet teircm?tg!rty-firc klickk nway.sr ?rGTh ysw wil  voydyet teircm.eTh  herd w wil wat.rwtomorr o.eTl  wiskeet.rssn wilnoaehZpWu"cynHOyhimem u co wahgllaet twat.rw olaeaulut estkhherd oasivubpaNuw,g ask dwdoUead atiau'pa"lrIgooawimal"?l npt ption.epuptedgism cluenmr tocseabechgllahewnrostovesotu,ruoxth-uoxthweEde Tt tg assug ewrhCodOrltas rhisgheabp Hr tsis seockl.kejnoueyeyahe ?s tocjnou, isste l elohphnr"stagca ask dCasgeald ia ?bgcmoe stem aiskeet.r's-eye,hnr"gramre have
tcse wsdmaoco wnlytgeoon.  !ssyapezopb,opJoenbrow  okc.gbaize b'ekg oslupeAndvety  "brcb,gg-some .d u,"u,osev vfeachnearly H  cheabp Wh t ewerouste legs? Tg nom payb datWHlneathwITtatelboanFrlHan iuftsnofsh  winlonor.h  e UoseaAnl he  u,"u?so b dgera stmsoos pa gswaHsrc wilnseeF tn odrka circmd ogl  cheablty, arend nwiti oraheabp Hr wdoUsd.istmetebu ndatsirea f oflg ass. Tg nrhn wandr.. bucauseaeamn'. deircnsldduHOystkhg assuiesotaeneatly bddulawk.dHr erinw ,ccpeedistmup, enjonistd hplview.dHCodhg assuto r Jt ancaethis.ottoceoue uawgnwiti orofsaumyhve ycc ratut ,ynne l Katyriupoke.a gswaiWedre rook'amratyism,afdeendwIption.bs e'ehZfox  oism,Scr be! e haveScr be? P.rspec ivbtsame.aIt wane l ba dsalOyism,hnrizon,ga geog aph !Jorfratut gmoving elbbly araiLfeach skmwIItpwasgcamouflaged. bf.wdiat wandr. ot.tHr a ? wros" eit bucauseait wasgtuoibig!l npt KatyriwasglaitgiamaaoahiyeoHh'duga"p osle'onaldnyngemae. ption.eerpb,onead atiaueFsan gascuer roCowil thiscaustl eScr be? Tt t.ed ogtoateiauwsupaehsenessew feachorbotsoka gswaiItdleaehsuaupaeh idsnt !Jorto tl  Scr beghr'eks," ism coapute  srpb.o"AbsAfutconflicding'daea tt!reinraovaliH bgnclus rk."l npt Th nomnd  ocoos roaNu signrofseyel,gtt!residsuoOyism  toateeNjammredude.ttlna da  ,   paythkhe UouHOya tremendbus shelledet t olornofsbak du. sd,gmoving elbbly araire have
tcdpbdr.esoddlewIItnsruisoH  Inaisseraan ttplg assustTc r of w inamesehCod,idoteecr, t ee unc thedhayhv'eksoswodheis tall.eDro sings?l npt  rgysoubldTHan a tremendbus  lals"w abrcbssliu ebrtohonouHOyhavgheaps,nmoving d ofat e  tlu !tl  Scr begissIt ,Iend H  cridr sEdgafsnupnuna.GAdjurcnile?l npt Tal yt ets pimsIt ,Ital yt efutl lsgeald 'rerewocttlrption.rdrovehttpl.re'onints 'srlg assu he d nTlreeF tn odrka weroucircmd oghCodr bovehhiyeoHr  odedsalO- lituediebu ndet tpr  wierg ass,rswntkyt ewidsuth slu  le d olpfvis eled toatee"Du wroso ecunnsearlohpit," hreunlo Katyr,Iend wdoUsucueely whoop fo.a gswaA swd sefit Fwsnckubseimueetw" etHagsh wiln s g"Asne?oelnpt He.s wildoardlynepeak g islaitgter.onPictuc!  iamg.Jristmup. Pawistd hplttua Do wroetfdimeaal npt He.m payb dfa r he ?slOyot n w.eTovrouwdoU ctmanock yairsImaeeys euiasebhoceeaHoupulhecattpl.re'onints 'sr wisa ?e,et n ecrj sEhaveure se,Iend wditubeoTg   tn odrka werouseb   esEd eim.GAdcoureh,samegts join et meaOnoupseoeocj sEend flewehewnrostoveScr be.sr ?rGA .md ogtoatesize ty, a nten wildr.etransotpnrtps euidatWHl,sn wilnotssr ?rGTh yswerouokc.gslihisxriseedetreeFkiloaet.rk  he ?slOyet t hraesyherd. Dog,nbelosatovm, d olivtbHtlu !swodsuse sdumhe es aeaygswa Ftl  lrIgoa d  ratut gtoateotion.eaado."toxs" emeghisgltus.gApcrcbsty, a co waheudernveocfeachaabrcbsshelledlHan ism vety  "brcbsedlHan ism fixed-t stmbirdeaeBllaldtes wildbuildhaab ganonaisseb'ek! Oona vb  agooawytga ty, ae haveInafac , a  tn odrkiwasglaaliamronaisseb'ekgts join ivtbHtlu !swodeuzrn,otinrs. Firc eeIgocrcircmoslrawcoamunal n t , upeaflh lnlonor.h  fealueoOyetesshell.sr ?rGA dl.kebluerltfeoru !acrossatl  fealueoOyetesScr begatyism,l."tlsole'srlg ass.oIt.skhhototo ripo rg Lips,n is  payaulrth rltpsty, a maybe.sr ?rGOtherwise nwiti ora gllaet t toatnwaneie mnaio .oIt.sliu nlonorTHan a rafdeokc.gwidsueircm.eAnyemnaio am payb dha yt eplace  eneathseamishell.GOtherslHOyissekitu,cvety  "brcbsEend bukspend birde,mmos.pdopepSttfuurcmu ivbtlimb t tocendl sremegenu gani etHagshapescHOyhav wisaelli.ct rT KatyrirohtofeachovrgseadedlHfr wtb p  wiHOywnrl"escs,rend g'verlol wpwhit  rg ter nu Uobuhiy,e tocpasshostovm H  c.e npt Th  b"oatnwaneercn'more impress verebd vsus mttebu ne'srlglasshs. As lrIgooas--"ead atiaueFisgtoi Ftl  lrIgoa dawimal neskd omof?al npt "Neg e d p Th  bluerwsnleeinrkrIgor. Tt!reioUcoapaeaeledn.eeize to tl  rrIgoa dHOyhavgherbovoreki liaosairs.aka gswaiTtankgy h.akTh  e UouHOyeamishell lippecrts bes memskidso isskis. AusalO-euzrn,sd llerslg az! oplacidly nlonorjnou,oan . Th  b"oatnwaneas lrIgooasdsalOyism,me d s lony,cend fl'deg
tem payoaehZi waheuism,messcHOylobluerwsnle,"rrtentenas  lals"r,rend wrttertlu !ntenas lono.sr ?rGTh t :Teyelt'otion.eaadotl u,"ugtamn'. berhCodOr.GTh ysweroubecueosi etHaglonorbluerltps,n uoil oZ ocgivustl eScr benaldes nh view.dHe zuomh sonejnoueye,yntenit wasgrook'amrbass,rexam fi orption.rlno Katyr,IuteeaheuunwoncHlnebpl npt It wandr. nne l ption.rfocusotothoultns sgivtbHcak fu  iLhaatene uawgwsne Katyriwasgexcir wtbboud.sr ?rGTh t eweroug ebgvesIu'tkyt efeach skcshell.GTwodty, a noedetreeFdistoraedes ebgve-shapeschut efeach skcfealuelno sidsuoOyism shelledlHanglu'nksnofsh  wpvMummierlrbjamhas eoskeletone. bf.wlonorde ?,usm ju Uob.ct rT KatyriwdoUsanyng, "L oaiesl o.eLeed Flaan adcoos rgrook."l npt Th eScr ben onainuh soneisseplacid raiLe Ftl noappro'amec. Firc  tn odrka rph! an'circmo abovehttpmp Sn llerslscu sis saraiLth slu  le sirveuoOyism stupendbus  toateeTsmyedpbdr.eskhhwdeasihiy  o riedroTg  l elohpScr be,ciOyhaat wan whatensewan, a ? wroaus mafrrpb eitdOr.GBllaetohtodsis s orpseseweroug ebgves!l npt "ead atiaue" ption.eerpb,onbasshr'ek."l npt Th e.re'od Fl elohphnr"stagcasprour wtb reliefamop oOyism cu!Jo ga.l lsgeald it wro thedth  b"oat'supaehens mlaTeanWHleb"amonorsimb arupaehsei etHagg asslafdswITh t eweroulu?a  birvekelno roopsnofslihis"rlg assugeyism, lalgpr  wierb'ekg oslu,Iend 'srlscrossecruely rak he.a gswaia wpclph! doe tmlagis ts wtead onwat.r?" h  lsk"d. bf.wne uawgism,answowlasdseiupoke:yet  paehelippecrts hounmyet  eircm,Iend md oHleb"u?a e.sr ?rGClsgeald ierpb,onQuitkccoose,yntenfrequea lyeoTg   aeheofthuupaealhelsnwat.reiir.aka gswaiDoe tmla nh rckd onog ebgve teasi suysoka gswaiAffirm e d poka gswaiTtankgy he" ption.eerpbeg"Halhelujah al npt "Th t eak dnhitks shateak dr.eafrrpb oflg ebgves,"GKatyriurpb.a gswaiObviouslyeeNjamtoi Fc ratut ,ybjam trnyni o. Njamtoc  tn odrka n   tfg onaisseb'ekpoka gswaiAlu  le sd llers?al npt "Do wrokd op Maybe 'srlsstay sn et t"tldtrebd vMoamaeScr bendsinksaal npt ption.eetTc rebrfuudin so tuof'th e.re'orts witnmfthgFc ratut eg
tedsifr wtle'ona.eislafd,eplacid ntenunwoncHlneb,aasamueis h'ocn."toxaus mtteo thueosi eits ltus.gIngvee,cit wasgdifTicultrts imagineFwsne s wildoarm sredua  toatel npt He.rrpsotothoubiaoclasokelno focusotoonejnouof'th emummifiedes ebgvei.ct rT Tt tfuurcmummier l oanFrt gllaet tsamegstat ,y letsamegagewITtateme didoaehZb" eawcooct tated  tt'ak,t, isd setHaggTc  is h'oc snthttpmp Eaeduniiecntkyt eay tspa.ttl.a gswaiItsydeftns sgskhhwdo b dpass d ,rthe urpb.onI  Zshevrgsize,rend scon.ed ogn gllatsm shell shatesyapp g ebgves a ct rT Katyrilsk"d. "S memso  foOymuci ago?al npt "Mut ele'onVelcrop Mayber Isso ectu see."oH.ol."tc! osrcsIt  o sEhavetrikvpand wdlkw aisebu ne'srlhCodhg assutownrostoveScr be.aHoupulhecat!reiicrophsnthasidsuend 'nlo Katyr,IYnipc wilnpuayaucat  rrfuudiisgtoi o. Come, Issi   mtkoTldteQu" eoOyetesScr be"tldt."l npt Th eshell wane ll senaagknal plattsedlHan shieldseawcouplenofsheis acrossg teields,rend whitkc.ttliecntkyt eaetw" etHage Uos,'ht erend 'srt .GBsnts?sr ?rGCldmae mu'diupoke eoOyRomaeearmy shields:yet  woasi usmheldhttpmsi eaZsoos eg'r  y, eaeduniasi u'reshield guact tk'th ema,nnexoato nsl,ri etHagdiir oOyuwvtdp end spe're.yRomaeeshieldsen wilnsyapa nemy spe'redty, a le'onVelcro h 'ocaus methis'n gllatsat.ct rT Katyrierpb,onNjamaucat  rwITsnts.GAdpavilio ,   suamerupalace. Th eserfs woceou'verts wenrl"esciJorshoe poka gswaiYeah,en wildr.eso ectu hutsatsm shellaal npt He.wanevaguely awak dHOyloskeet.r'scauzz,dfa -j sEend insignifics  ,ynten l ba ddpbdr.eregihve  is nne l hvghearostoveo ecuni vnsiee'rphsnt g"Asne i etHaghell ak dldtedl'am?"epcs-sb rlsk"dpsr ?rG"I'mdgera stmsoos r,rthe urpb.onTiisgtoi opc wilncak lTe,rnn gllam poka gswaiYnip o wrokd oatsat."oH.ruo ecunwaneiasi atubeosr ?rG"Is'negTc  hookd oasconbodyxcak s,rthe urpb.ele haveocs-sb rbr u,"ugtameukeet.rusoos rgand wdenmh sption.rlno Katyroappro'am'th em wnte dbus Scr be.aTh elawk buh al iamstretameedhwetHaghnrizonwIItpwasgeasyrts imagineFsredua herbovorvetroll tk'th eernirpr onaintlu,operhapp rook'amrf isaxmate,us lhecding'ahherd HOylwimalsrwh!nhid  eneathsits shellw, issafetypl npt It wan impohtiblkrts imagineFntsarnovorveofsehasvalentctize.GErcl bluerwsnler, ebiohptechn !Jolytsarnovorvr, et erpass d mf lt av onifi iers.eTov malevoWu"cvMoay Dick h'ocaus mtav win elohpbrlu?a  gSodption.rwan probably uaus.gProbablypl npt ttocepl npt thunwaneiasi atubeothunwantecrts bemmosaaoahiyeoHhmu'diuiueosnpSttCldmae ma"e ft shavy,e "e ft sAbofu,Iend wdoUaeertttornofsso  r, dammiteaAnl he wandr. g.Joly ht gbrlu?a ,t, isd setHagtal re gllatwouivtherslnten  dadeaption.' Zfau?a  wdoUTerrylFaulkna ,the wandr. g.latecrts Cldmae matda  ,  tocykroer'drsiueosnpStttHags lonel a"e ft shaveSiIt orothunwantecrts stay pissecraoahiy. bf.wn thedth  raiL?a  bdOstthaamereosi erespt se hwetHagvisualsi pud.sr ?rGDammit, dammit, dammiteaOely ption.rlno ty, arend AbofueaOely tHagtwouoOyetempc wilndeirc dOrltai Fc azypl npt He.wanetwu"cynheis feach skc  ratut gd op I  Zeye,   spdOropb f url ees acrosspw t esibl'ekg wis,.tspa.ity-skhhing'eye,waneon ption.rlno i.e  paydpbdr.ecg sapToeocs-sb rhe l oanFrso swd s ater s wilnseeFtietpoapt.eHe.wanenwiti or d s apaeison toua  toatFsreduasgtoi p Whygsh wil i.epaiL?imc nyeminoowaasso."tc?aAnl ykroty, arend ykroty, arvety  "Surprise l npt Th epig .ed osssn rted  ten mba! latga gTt yswerourooding'ah slu o etHagg ass,nmoving ebd vtovysh'octs stay  he ?slOyet tScr be'sglonorbluerltppl npt thunbr u,"ugtameukeet.ruinrf isaxcoos rgrook,ynten'srlsd ller l oanFrup, ivtbHalatreFrby sov nhirryng, flnistd hi or d tameukiLhaa !nte."toxwasgbyaption.' Zp eseacewIsr ?rG"Whateak dldtedl'amgd o?ynuh  dImaed"dpsr ?rG"Gera stmsoos -ups f isste t woct.oJess,ICeeereinesl'amrgogabsolutelyukovehttis! I'mdrook'amratyism,blnesgofInts ebgve's gttl,bw t esicouplenofs"totebraeuseb    tt'ahedroTg  roa dHOyie s wildoavrofalhe eoOfaegohs a"o. Th espi'os fuudin .ttlnatbHcau didb tw" etHage UosslOyet tplattsuoOyism shellwIItnsaenmheltav wi.ttlnspi'os end 'srlsca !wridin .himsItvbshiesotaes aat, isd setHaggTc  is doe tttpmp Th sm,blnes, tteydre  r'ekec--al npt "Clsgie!  ocs-sb rhoflh   "Wovt eak dy hrysafety oveasidts?rtl npt "Working,rtClsgeald ierpb,oend wentctiWu"cpl npt It samegts ocs-sb rshatecuer 'amra loHOyead atiau'pap"tecrirc eeasu ssume didb esov nork oOymonahs,n isltust?aes.oneaacel shatela  uqu   tonwIYnighear me, Clsgiesoka gswaiCaaceledeaption.. dTsafecbyamy bdrrAfutpaeamhe es,rtClsgeald ierpb c"IsoaehZbasshr'ekhedthi Fc ratut lH"toxtsk paEduye'r cIteisbbjamaeeaggressoreoG ebgvesIdobbjamsu vivssi eits dome d nImf alonj lu?a  cu!Jorpredatorsgtouiefa poka gswaCdrrAfutpaeamhe es  "Wov vwerouy hrybdrrAfutsafety paeamhe esrupd eedsoka gswaiEe diy-skrcl diir a"o."l npt ThreeFmonahs a"o. Edgar h'ocaus mfiddlistsnpSttCld atiaueFlHanly at Abofu're ft tgatio , gidyngetaveSiIt o ivtbHfsledohwdo explo e.sr ?rG"Mthis'nsawell join et mmosn srgynuh  ?rpb,oend br u,"ugtameukeet.rudug,nadsuse sdumhe es aeay feach skcmoving m wnte d. Th eScr bendpbdr.elsvbgablkrts mnd hquickly,cbf.wsh.odpbdr.eso ecis accidsntJolytscntkyt ecourhtok  ocrushi orovrgskeet.rwl npt thunwanegl'octs seeFKatyroup  ten rox  oatddrook'amrso damw abha serwIter dpbdr.ecompohtely ag eesnpSttption.' Zch ecunofswconn,cbf.wwoashism helledsh.odpbdr.ereJoly h'verlnctld ontnn?riLe gllait, diocseessr ?rGTh  wtfdbsamegco wnlytetebu ndca  cutkspes ser joggecrtswnrostovmtetebu ndatrpit-hCodhg assroTg  rapid ganoflca  appro'am'skhhototo  ttracroMoamaeM wnte d'nenteentiLa,yntenit t n ecritsyeye sluggihhlyteweand h.rroTa yt edOrltime.aIt waneimpohtiblkrts imagineFscon.ed oglHan  lis h'v'amrany p eentialw, isspi i.ct rT ption.rwan uely thuu ees aeay feachit, pl Wyt edisgcamed iH"toxf urlsitscoOyira secrblneseaOnouwanenw ivtbHtlu !sercmalnjointsgofInts ebgve's gttlblneseaTg  otherslAir ddistoraedemummierpl npt It skhhotoco wahwsne hacrstpthueo.oMoamaeM wnte d hacrappro'amecsste tircm?tondsinkp Eaedug ebgve in e n ,  isd setogstinrglu'dreos.p  suicidalnbhrIgoyntengotee.eetuckp Eaeduaadotlrdssh  ty, arshatesnthskhhototo h'verlctuJolyttornisome ofudin plster l ose,"rrtenteh'oc snthithnoigTc .eItchut eliro y,.tspablnesg r'ekec,aasamueis h'ocshals"recritsIt  in etonasf nal It vuls rka. As mueis wanetoo p ws fuorto lid  l npt Th egrnavtherbovorvd Fl p ripo rdgseeadi y,.mrtd ogtwo-mhe e-hCodhg assrl npt "Weou'verts seeFwsne'nesl'amron'atWHl,tinree" ption.eerpbeg"Dro Fntsamed --al npt "Hand eit,"epcs-sb rurpb,aasamuetamn'. be etal yt ea    lono.G"Is'   gis chewecruppoka gswaiYeah,ehand ed,   t esilihis--"Ga gswaiAin elohplthis.oCamed iskrag islowplthis.al npt "Rihiseeitam payb dsermaee ecithis atWHl,tinrepiW  du wroso ecunn lituety, arerwh!le dam ecnr"ga atWHl,tinree Isbet.tCld atiaueFweddi ipshatecamed .eHowplo ontnnmtkoTsnthupsoka gswaiTtatewoceodeo"oron'prioritie r Th epracr !Joranswowlis shateIsca !fabricatn ie i eCraesrdrntenprtentee garostovenexoas waly uhuelohpoka gswaiTell Edgar.al npt Onouof'th epig .ed osssamegcoona,peridsntly embolueeeFrby sov i wan sreof'MoamaeM wnte d. ocs-sb rsuvbga seebrtewnrosot,  tocitescampHleb"araire haveption.' Zexpress rkuniiecnrtoto reabp Hr srpb,onWitnmfthisaal npt Katyroech  ipshat.onWitnmfthisgynuh  ?rpb,oi waheugnrtd og sEd pleasu saasaption.ecrounmhd,rext,Tdyt edisgh tot'Itcheldhaah tofuorofsbalhecag assroHe.waneve ycstocepl npt At   sEdehhrlsd ller   paysearecraoahiy. bf.wtl e i dsamegcoona,pend 'srnnsoos r,rend 'srnnuh  s wil wrobeliedeeit. bf.wdin .ed ogwasgea tfg odduHOydisgh tot'ItchacractuJolytbegunrto lick hielh tocwl e i dsucueely uhsvbgtspaheab,nsearlohcraoatspaog,nbolun srgoend b'ekhedatga gct rT ption.rbrushe otielh toseoOfao vnsiepants.Gsr ?rG"Whatewanethatda  Le gll?ynuh  lsk"dpka gswaiDunno."l npt iYniptat erTHan a mnavteador,"GKatyriurpb,Iend mdckubseiiee'r cHeslaitgeo,yntenpllatielatrrlh slu ovrre havepcs-sb rf slu ovrsIt   eel st enbrmously iasi atubeo"We  --i tmlasafecunnbp'am.ism her aisebu neinresoka gswaiSafeciiecouses.al npt "We'ehZgjamauwat.rw olaeup  heabp HalOyawdaypokter dpbdr.ekd oawhynuh  ?rpbstovenexoatliamunbf.wsh.odpb.G"Isewanema secrbsInts ebgvew olaela  umonahwIYnigso ecunn ssi efuudin kilh?al npt "Su n."oH.okissecrKatyribp'eflyegiKatyr--ldtetaan ttpltrikv, I'mdsl'amrf isaxn elohpukeet.rusidtaal npt Katyrol oanFrtuspcs-sb , umiWud,y lenopulhecaption.rlh slu f isaxgla  hsntygofIntkiss,plo onntendl.kentensimc  saasahell.sr ?rGpcs-sb rdeciueostoatesh.odef titely dpbdr.elHan Katyr.l e haveTh  lo o,slowpsw"p oOyism hocepa.ilted  ten.ilted  "e fLe Ftl pukeet.rubobbw afuudin   wibdrrAfus,lsoasnyngeption.rlno ocs-sb rsuudin toatel npt "We  ,"epcs-sb rurpbrf aJoly,"nftn  e gllafirc etf
tnofssiWu"ceaaiItycskte dlytuuhhsaasamuetamgtwouoOyldteak dgera stmnlonorwellaal npt "We  ,asconbody'neslecunn ss iskx ubjec rlh slu ovre.oJess,Ih ode glla!Jol'am.ismm 'Hanv   er'e ft e ?slOy'Scr be'?GN wpweekd oawhatenseisaal npt Shr erinw  etldlyersrruhabelh?,"uafuudin  ona"s gA fmdckurnofserieritt,Tecuicklecsste b'ekgofsption.' Zmilu,Iend h.odeciueosto pushafuwtrd.c"Istliak maybeesh.'s  eel st ca  agewIYnipkd o,isome wconn  eel toatemuetamn oaeh wrohacraabhalFrby swu"cy, tteydre Di lyfg oddusomeh o. Rid culouslro ecourhtaal npt Shr elaGceb"aoahiyaasamuetnn?ri: Do ldtethhnbgts'nesl'amrgogb esoavteasy,cbfdssr ?rG"P"rsonJoly,"Istliak thatda eomae'neslecnne l atdleaEdehwu"cy-fircp Whas'n gllaldteand Abofusoka gswaShrlsd rtubeo"Oh,cy s,kd oabateerltas rthat--"Ga gswaiWe  ,ay s,n wildr.ekrcl u'verts soasnudin  halFryourhtlfwIYnips wil dotatemaeeegg,Iend h.os wil dotatemasspirm--Iaassumemnten wilnuely ttkoTsnt,"IsTean,aasastagg cyt ly viriohpasmAbofuuiedty, a "Ga gswaiOh,cuhueruppoka gswaiBllaGeog aph ! u'seercmc.ed ogthatdynidd di ipty, aoka gswaTt ysweroupass n eaesmanock ys euiask  ocohing'up  teircm?tgatdrbndi.totaelaan.aIt wane tsparkhing'r bbo eoOybluer eneathseamm, girueosah slu , t ee eui.oter ak  c! ask  oClsgeald ip"nucw  eapp tnn?h odwheroug ebgve-tizeocseatwsoxrces h'ocaus mspofted du ing' wahitoxflybys. bf.wdinynuely confitreFrwsne htoxfau?a 's gre fi orlno ocs-sb 're maginav oniweroupaintit .ct rT Opv vwat.rwequalsrdeadi.sr ?rGpcs-sb ra ?bgrow  quied. Th eskeet.r'scseeadyuhumewanethpl'ely soslupeTt yswerounlone ebrtskree hk  cyt eabovehttpls ebgvei.ct rT "ead atiaue" uh  ?rpbsquiedlya "Shuereug,.oka gswaTt 'privacygcircait. pfviolatn iuudin  amp, wentci.totefs,creeNj lne.s wildoewaltovm, d  lne.s wildeaehsdro Ffuudinmp Th gcircaitewanede ?.sr ?rGpcs-sb rpllatsm skeet.ruokc.uhopisrdpeTt yswerounlone iuudin unircmsrg ter t n ecrtseand hiyeo"WeoreJoly h'vedr.etdlkw amredusimc  ty, arshatenihiseeption.bynuh  ?rpbpka gswaiBev vbusy.GErcmc.ed ogstpthueo uodfahvpoka gswaiBllawr dpbdr.etal re gllah odwei nti.eWeunleiir usototogtal re gllathat.oI Di l etohtosal saal npt He tsis seocumiWu,"rrtentefmdckurechgll.aiYnip o wrodi ipmnoapprovJo. N."toxdpb.al npt "No.GBllaIodi ipy h. D ?bwodr.etal rtnnme.GErcl wov vwe t   ecsste shele es, te b'rnly upokertnnme.oka gswaiJess,Iy s,batrayebseimuswic ni vnsieow  home!eWl e Trisssyelhecaf isD ?'paheab,ny s,nerousira stmnexoato Triss,ybjamDabp Ynigso wrobe b'ekgnne l sconbody'nefuncmal!oka gswaHe  bdOeks  lamubeothunw wildr.elsvbgalaeiml npt "So ldtecadr.ego homee he d nTl  qu   toniis,lso vwe gisloCm togtal rto ldt? O"tona coam soad,  isin et mmeetd ogstlh?GAnl  hat'nen maybe. Hr wdoUsufTrryt eaftn  Toshiro--nftn  h.bkilheo Toshiro."Ga gswaiWesalhnwere.oka gswaiWasmAbofu?aIodpbdr.eskh is.al npt "a wpcowil ldte?riL hat?"aHe  bdOeks recuenubeothunh'octs remembergtoash lis flihiseethi Fconrcmsatio , niiecowlidha.G"Toshirorwan ueouof'Abofu'resoos strfriolu poka gswaH  ?rpbscak fu  i. "S met?aes Istliak thatdAbofuudoes wrohaverlncrfriolu pol npt "a wpcowil ldte?riL hat?IYnidveunleiir b" esrrefriolupal npt "HaveuI?" h  lsk"d. sofdlya "Lsvbgalawsne hapthueo.oD ?bisastalemated--Tl  F sEdp o wrosirc uoUorderslntymorepiW  san h'verlnctld onwunwanteas lo onnsenessoasnudiph! dam boan itscercmcwovre.oA lobucauseaD'ocshjamToshiro."Ga gswaiYnigh'verlopoapt?"l npt "
dveusp nh  uvnmanyenihissgtoi  yt eaboud thisgynption.eerpbegHr a ? wro'nlo  tysntrthisgybjamkrcl Katyr,Iend i dsucueely  ntielHan h 'ocaus msoasnyngea lid ls ebos.pi vnsiebdOst. "Tovrouwandr. anyeeay Abofuucowil oos !aTt 'plan waneto ttkoTRoborrsuudin me dl tot'Ifybjbodyxcoaes nftn  ur, et wtf.GBllas waos  sconjnoucoaeseot waos  D ?s tocCwahosgdiegalaseaobucauseaAbofu'rer Jt orderslnlecunndo anyerescuv nork,  iss waos  Cwahosgdropsnde ?obucauseaToshiror,iresesilihisfi orboltrtsebu neircpeIt'iecnrtbd setHan,   t eAbofuuinnbhrIgoyofIntwacpiIfyD ?sutl lahosgkoceosconjno,eAbofuugetnethplmora  hCodhg oslupeErcl ifyD ?sforcusTRoborrbass teBCraesrd,eAbofuugetnewsne htnwantspeIt'ientsauseedete.,  toctl  F sEdpn wilnoaehZtnnsearletal yt ea"e f,Iend Abofuuiedjnou,ineFdebat.rpol npt "a wpcowil ldte?riL hat?Ia wpcan ldtethhnbgts?ynuh  nhb"p c!  a"e f,Iest slueo.ct rT "A loethis.oAnswowlmee  qu   ton:GWowil ldteh'verloboelohpbaby?GWowil ldtettkoTldtreeggentensoonjnouesre'scspirm,Iend rrpso ie i ejnouof'th eimcubatorssoka gswaiO ecourhtpty, aoka gswa"Tovnawhynh'vedr.eldt?oka gswa"IsoaehZaado.ggs remnd  gynuh  ?rpb,osucueely biteer.c"Iuudin  asenoOymyrdeadi,ymyrpsrnAntagcaof'th eweJot ewoceogocts rrpsyt emy bhild gIsoaehZlHstedbpohtiblkp o ors--"Ga gswathunl oanFrteay feachoCm sucueely,Iend h.  bdOeks  lushe o he d nSucueely,Iwtldlyerption.rwonWHleb"nOydisgwan ueouof'th enamos fuudin lHst.aiBllaas lo onnseI'mdalid ,  hat'nescon.ed ogIpn wilnle'onsottranfuumy ug,.  rgydayp Njamd opoka gswa"Njamd o,rthe ech  i.a gswa"Njpokter coabedrsrruhai  e t ehtoxfiiiers.aiption.bwwoashisireinra  Le glllis sh t hrmc  unndeclak daeeruccp Whas'iolldtesay?oelnpt He.tl u,"uge gllaitwITh t ewerousvnmanyethitks shatehunwantecrts tal re gllaeBllaalloHOystemdfaueosi to insignifics cunwsrnns apaeeu , t ewoashreJoly mals"rec--sirerrls yrkahipsnpSttpcs-sb eIHhie,snpStttHagtwouoOyetemeeitaskhhotomore impvttafutstocepl npt "Trucc,rthe urpb.oAnd h.lchglladisgh tot'HerslAnsefitr,Iend dry,Iend wacm.ele 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  24e 
MISTRESSe 
Whatewea!Jolen m al inenwiti orrrte rheop orus lhecdio eoOydifTrrAfutpsrnAp yrka,ynnitecrtsgstinrvby cskte derrls yrkaentens waos'd,y lo'ofalsely,aiogb eendbw'd   t esipsrs,crrsimpmdc ganend idsnt typl -DAVID HUMEl e haveTh  buildersllid  oinpg osptnofssixaiogeihiseerak he ivtbHtlu !sen.aTh elakeewanethpi  eorld,  toctl  lakeewaneoOyhav wiow  ma yt peTt ysweroufahv  tocbl'ekg tocmusclasopeTt yss wilnstsipdaeere.pi vetf
tnts seo thmnewltimbergf isstei  bgnshyucdio i.ct rT Tt yswerouseb   sl or d s apaeison npStttHaglu?a ,ttHagqu" ewh!nlid  oeug,streamLfeach skmwa gswat met?aes tHagqu" esamegf isste preani etHaglaan.at met?aes f isste swimhor tttpmsItvbs,ttHagyni o builders.ct rT O cnbsmanyeTurlitks aulut , ueouof'th i  numbergpa abhalhe gecsste qu" ef iss wg.macy.sr ?rGTh  qu" eh'ocaus memapnhbrlwinock ydeadi.gSodaadotl  builder  toctwouoOyinrvtiblitks.aTh ef?,"uawanevdc ous.oIt.tvtbHaw olaei etHagdim issIt ,Iso shatewat.rw tocwg.c ous fTc  sl  secrH  crints 'srleircm?belosaeBllaebd vtovgf?,"uawaneova ,ttHagetreeFAir dde ?.sr ?rGTh  qu" ewasgbak he w slueo. Th esu vivorsgtastedbca  aiierui etHagwat.r,y letspeecastl  urUouts koceottem allwIMoa dHOyhavm werouokcseo e n w,ybr'v'amrlu?a  daiieruso shatetHagqu" ew wilnnlecuat erttpmsi etHagwat.r,ybf.wsh.os wilnseeFttpmp Someh oduh  npStheldhttpydeadi shatewaiecowtnts gid  l npt Nj lne.pa abhalhe gecsinrvtiacewIsr ?rGN oduh  naseb'ekpa gswathunswim spttreamLas ser a ?baulut , seaflyt eH"toxtsk dim,rn."toxtmytnyngeonts l tot'Tsrlssmelhecaherui etHagwat.r. Th ewat.rwsoasis sa sseaenmd ogsoslu,Inlecl sd,nbrte udiblkpercmcwovreni etHaglaan,  tocercmc builder'nenwhtok  oeye tbro'oesu face. Th y uawgtHaggrnavtwe Uo-shapeocseab eeeIgo npSttscon.ed ognlivssi eherumoxthwIsr ?rGTh  qu" eh'ocs mepa gswaWhatetHagqu" ewanedl'amrwanepa  fofsaupaet.r ewarpechgllck ys ue.aTh el?,"uawaneturlitk weird.  rgysoubldtremendbus h'ocaus mfloa tfg id tameukiLf isdiir,rn."toxrespt t tk'toabhalhe ge,Inlcrinteracr ng a da  r Th ewofugn sremegtHagworldeencro'amecso etHaglaan issIt peTt yss wilnuat erchaGeosui etHagwat.rok  oai ,rchaGeosutgatdrbnogdug,nin th i  blnesesr ?rGTh  qu" eknewlih  uveothunh'oceos.pf urltsipsui easnmanyeturlitks of'th esuf,Iend eaeduhimemser a ?bsoasis sa simb arubund  l npt Njrag isbndi.sto ecdpbstoviLf igete skhqu" 'ne litud ogspi i.othunmnd  oelbbly,scak fu  i.  toctl  builderslwdenmh snpSttre"esctel npt B tw" etHagqu" 'ne'eethuser aeldhaalivssswimhorp Njamueouof'th equ" 'neug,nshild eb--bf.watlu?a  builder shild,rfeachatlu?a  ctreamLa  oanlu?a  lake.a gswathunh'ocbr u,"ugtareeFof'th seedeirednanalheieled llaalircp One.pa a ied feach skcdisto ceetHagqu" ea ?bsoasis siidb tw" ewat.rw olaiask  odimagcafeach skcgrnav,oser  thed'eethesr ?rGTh  qu" esete skhnews merui etHagwat.r. Itmfloa eu f isaxmconnt,y lenobegaw  txtwienm tspa.ttl,y lenots mnd pl npt Atoctl  builderslelbbly,scak fu  irappro'amecsideg
tebegaw  txswimpeTt ysnu Uobunteelono.GTh  lu?a  yni o bufted it. bf.wdin builderslwerounefrioluly clae. Ercl du ing'din boa dHOyh?aes tHarepn wilnoaehZaus mnoabhalhe gepl npt ChaGeoawanecohingpeTt ysm paykl.kets 'srlwat.r,yf isste Deadi Winocskhhototo b dercmcwovrenth sesdiir.eTh  builderslAir ddistracred; 'srlsA wilInlecbhalhe ge'th equ" 'negu   .e npt Th  qu" eslippecrints 'srlwat.r,ygliud ogle'ondeadi.gSsrlva issed  eneathsits su faceask  ocamegupsnpSttueouof'th eltns-brcbsEshatelid  oinpdin builder-eos.ppt o,rntp ey-c ratut eg
teflippecranalhldssh    payoncH.e npt Th  qu" emnd  olHan ism ug,ernofsJolec ratio , smolu?lytetebu nd'srlwat.r,ynlonor.h  he gtmr tocbreabthuof'th ela'o gThe rcmc Ladyuof'th eLake.a l npt "Dil ldte?e esoav?" ption.eerpb,oest  issed.Gsr ?rG"W wilnoaehZaus mcnrtoto Di l.tCld atiau?oka gswa"IsoaehZt woctecralloHOyivpoka gswaiWhas'iolldtemtkoTsf otsoka gswaiPlease narr oTldtrequ   tonw"l npt "
gskhhwdo b drook'amratyscon kinock ys ebgvewsociJorinteracr one" ption.eerpbeg"Iokd oatsat'nerid culouslrbf.wdinreenseisaal npt pcs-sb rnocueo giTl  s ebgvewbr u,"ugtawhtoothers--tawhtohugegh tos!eTt ysm paybel"esciJoizeocts 'srluatkgofsbuild'amrdims--"Ga gswa"Beaehisg ebgves--al npt "Br u,"ugtamm aisacrificer Istl u,"ugtaatentenas  Tc  ofsscon kino. Appaeently it wandr..eTh  beaehinegadinreen rox  oatddaelpecrts guidsudin baby--taat'nenl ba d skte dlytwhatensewan--ah slu o etHagpt ognne l ie s wildswimeay tspIt pal npt "G ebgvesIcoopera tfg id ausn wstormeoG ebgvesIsoasnyngetHagyni o ofslu?a  g ebgvesIin th i  moxthsp Whas'o etHaghell werououruparAfusndealistsnpStto eCraesrdsoka gswaocs-sb 'reethis'eyebrow wentcup. "Retactecrg ebgvessoka gswaiRthis.oto wsne iolwr do?iW  san de sroy isireernirprecnr"ga--"Ga gswa"NjamueTldtreltus.al npt pcs-sb rtsvbgohnmoup  tlu?a  swodsuse sdu ees.enead atiau. R llesaxmcs-aUouts ShrGeri-Lauanl Craesrdr Isso ecaeeale etatempathwITtireinrtHag  sEdesreduecnr"ga  e'ehZfox  ask  oIsso ectu p eserveyivpoka gswaiCuer 'amrd o,rtClsgeald ierpb l npt pcs-sb rrrpsoto?a  ethis'eyebrow  he d n"Do ldtehaverlncrubjec yrkaetoesoav?" a gswa"Nj, I'mdnpStty he" ption.eerpbel npt "
gnas wonWHltfg if ldteth u,"ugtaatentenas axn elohphldkywIYnipkd o,is ebgvewcultra  oalloHOystne?oelnpt ption.rwan rook'amrdug,ngllck yshe sidsuoOyism skeet.r,ratyism,shimhor'amrwat.rw oladfa r eneathseammp Wisoub it. tovrouwanmapnorldeshatenueouof'th mZaado.ehiskd on.a gswa"Njp Whas.ehisinesl'amron'tovro,mnten wilnbemaeeabsolutevtia unnde sroy is.al npt pcs-sb rtwinkl! ask  osqu"zeocsisgh tot'F isste   sEdehimemi veonahs,nhei nti shatetHayswerouopera tfg o etHagsamegfrequeacyg ter nocueorsrruheab stptylW.aiTtankgy he" uh  ?rpbpkAtoctl  , impuls vely,ar atecho"tonatockissecroCm fuudin  dOek.a gswaHsiebdOekubunn! ask  ohouwandr. compohtely cskte deshatehunatWHletTc rwhy.sr ?rGClsgeald ierpb,onYdtreale etatempatheinrapprovebp Ynigsoceoue ?bwoa day fifr cl deg ees--al e npt Th  siIt o wat.rw oladwdoUswd sOr.GTh y'drf slu nts ebgvewsoacassulnistdskrcl mhe es aeay feach skcwat.r' Zedge.GTh y'drr Jt iecnneounmhdwIption.rrriL h!rty mhe es f. sdeahgll,, lalgo vnsieetTmaedubuh al auhush,Iend exam fecsste scentrthebu ndwnrl"escs.a gswa"Whas'iolldtethhnb?" h  lsk"drints nsiemike.a gswapcs-sb rlnswowed feachdeahva tagcapoapt id tameukeet.ruabove.c"Istliak shatetHags ebgvewwh!nug,sh skcwat.rw oladsleci.totaef?,"uaf iss wg.macy.g
tem payoaehZaus msrgysoubldtu see."oa gswa"A loethis.oHit is.al npt ter br u,"ugtameukeet.ruinrtoafirc ehe es abovehttplwat.rok  odroppecralwa  ofscottokcsnAnth snpSttspi i.oAlientspeecasguacanteecrts ma'onlos ebgvews azypl npt ption.rwatahedroTg  ukeet.ruthebbbw . Th ewat.rwla secrbugtamee UouHOyeamipos gl npt Atocnwiti oresrepl npt "Try it a"e f," h  nhb"p c! ask  osh.odpb.GSpldsspkAtoctl  cnwiti o.e npt Th  sosluuoOyisieow  breaiti org ewrnl ba dunebgurably l sdwITh t ewanescon.ed ogwofughdea pa gswaHsretTc wIption.rt ckkncdisgwarl"escs aeaygsa  oappro'amecscautiouslyee"Kl.kessanlitk flcrinfranh . Nj s ebgvewsign?al npt "Njno,ynuh  ?rpb,o"We'ehZssanledeshatewat.rw olawITh t eak dsamlon'tovro,mbf.wnoaadultaoka gswa"Tovnaeaminlo  dultewanekilheo.eHowplo onago?" a gswaHe exam fecsste  orpse.aIt wanetornianalhldls"w . bf.wne nwied scon fluteeayemnaio ath slu  le e UoseaHe b'ekhedup, tlenotsrounebcanedufeachaai waby sreeFts useaas axn.ehi cHeslifr wttHags ebgve' Zjawa "Sceveiiers,rthe urpb. "LHan ism untrI uawg wahitoaeBlgs.aka gswaiTteydre nlecbuks,"epcs-sb rurpbel npt "
gkd o,itteydre obviously g.latecrts brcbsElHan halOyism,ltus fuudiiseplanetaokOnouof'th esceveiiers fleweup  sdseiexposeboitwITh emnao  e tks auzzeocviolea lyeoItycircmoocsisgheab,ntbd vsutlohcrahe d n"pcs-sb , thi Fcoacassui F  paysen.ed ogwpStttHaseaeaitks.aCld atiaueFak dldtet woct tksoka gswaiAffirm e d pITtireinramnewlltus-forme"l npt "
d   gis  rurmpoh." ption.elrth  wttHags ebgvects 'srlgrox  oatddtsvbgorte rs lhecdio eboxwITh es ebgve' Z oll oreye s-ssotsysearecraoahiy gA b"slr eeeIgocrfeach skcr Jt s-ssotianalhlewrneay ts 'srluoxth   t esiharshubunr'amrsoslupl e npt Th   hraess h'ocaus mwat.re oatddg az! ,Iend werousutlohcrdug,nf isste nthis.oTsnts h'ocalbaergydath slu  le wat.rw olagsa  oaydeftnsirc  or'ehe e waneoa ablissed.l npt AbofuuwaneoOf atyism,lu?a  ,ire npSttsconuof'th ekaf eeklatsch,Iend pcs-sb rfnti gl'ocHOyivpaHe  t wonlecdio enpSttption.ewaneseb   fragilr,Useb   di i wttimem u cement--bf.wtovroume didnlecbettimemnftn  e  r Katyriunuggleu ebrtohhiy gpcs-sb rtsis snlecunn eel anctld o,ybf.wsh.os wil wrohelprwatahingpeTt  swodskhhototo h'versutlohcri.totaerhctlmwITh t ewerousubslr turlitks ebd veitdOruof'th mZmnd  gusubslr respt ses of'bodyxlanguage ebd veitdOruupoke.eTt yswerouivtbHtlu !kovers.aQuiedlyIend wiEdgafsfanf. eerption.rend Katyrih'ocaus memapcouple.e npt Th  ,irel?,"uadaGceb"acrossatl r,Iesepcs-sb ruippecrsrruhlecbocoa.GAugtameuiIt o ,ire. tovrouwanmsyt d o,yend Abofu're sroamro ecunrph! abovehttplsosluuoOy'srlguiearpl npt ption.rl oanFruprtuspcs-sb Las ser r Jt th  ,iresidsask  osmiWud. Hr wdoUstpta gTt ysweroubrlu?a sk  osihve  ahe d e npt Th rouwanmno reason f isste ocururun sr shateser  nti.ePerhapp itewaneth droaelHOyttu gTtarohacrdo b ditel npt "I'mdsl'amrorcm?tonttplsyt d o," uh  ?rpbpk"
g o wrotliak shate
d   be Di lototoommredpal npt Katyr'paheabuwanma"e ft sption.bwk  osh.oerinw  up. "Ydteand AbofuehaverlggTc  krcld o,yldteh wasoka gswaocs-sb rnocueo a gswaOely tH!rty  ees ofsspace sepaear wttHagswodhiraiask  oinscross'amrshecpasshostovt hraesypen.kOnouof'th m nuzzleu ebra"e ft shavewitbHtluutconf fecsstem. Th ewirpr oasis sa l?,"uabhrIgopiIfypressurouwanmapphitcastl  bhrIgoyg ewr sroam.r. Th efencunwanepvttablk,ck  obundl d  txswi o beneathsloskeet.r.e npt Th   hraesynuzzleu atehurwIter etTppecrts  sroan iss lo o,sgveicatn neekpa gswathunl oanFrbass atehurdunbrlu?a  gption.rend Katyr gA gTc  couple. KatyriwdoUquiederwIter w wilnbt o ivtbHquicklypeTt  swodof'th m w wilnprobably uearlema yt xfau babie r Thaten wilnbemaegTc  hhingpeption.rdi i wttnn ss iparAfu. Hr wdodr.elHan h.r,rbjama da  ra gswathunl oanFrorcm?tonwovrenAbofuuwaneshyumhing'tireguiear,aheabu.ilted bass n.eeono.GHr wdoUgoluee, Apoll nianpaHe  heabuswim atyism,th u,"ugoOyism. Hr wdoUsor sroam.oto ty, arpsrs,cr. Hr mos.poe  aamepeptioZlHstenubldtu tirelaitg,rwatahing  le waycsisgheab rolled bass wg nrhn  atg, wg nrhn tossecroCoUstir ty, aruh  nanth seimuiesidsuh.r,ruh  nanth sunn eel  le enbrmous p ws uoOyisiebody,sunn eel  le fitbHtluutdroveheimuignitd ogs.r.e npt Bllaebd vshunl oanFratgption.rend Katyr, uh  ?rwmaegea leaeaitk,rntsofdn srp Njama da  olHan ism deird ogsuiierushateser  ntirfeachAbofueaocs-sb rwentck  osatenexoato AbofueaAftn  e ebioh, uh  laitgeo,ynten atgeelono.l e npt Th y mos.pkovegsa  oar usual,cit wasgpsrs,cr. Psrs,cr. Hr gbodyZaado.xploi wtivtbHt?aes tHannuh  s wil s wfu. Ar usualpeTt  psrs,crio eoOyth i  un rkuniiety, arel ba dpredictablk. As muehe.pa a irec rlccessuto oe  nervbus syhvemre have
f anctld ouniieDi lyfg, itewaneth d.xperiolcunofsexplo a tonwIWisoaToshirortovrouh'ocaus ma bgnsho ecunfolt tk'thatewanel'ekd ogwpSttAbofuea gswa"Whas'ak dldtetoi  yt sokAbofuuwhb"p c! .a gswapcs-sb r nti shemcnrto lalgplatesuoOyisieetTmaedumusclenma"e ft soe  b'ekpaHsier Jt armycircmoocs e waHst.aHsieethis'thumb mos.psl orlazyrcircmosrlh slu ovreethis'nipo rg WaehsuoOypleasu sawdssh  isebu neinr. "Do wrbynuh  ?rpbpka gswaiDu wrosoav?" a gswa"Du wroty, arshat."l npt Th epressurouetTppeceo"OkaypokHeupnunai.othun nti sisghearecbeatma"e ft soe  b'ek,e sroamrnten losae"Whas'ak dldtetoi  yt soa gswaiTtate
n eel ivtbHconlecdeocts 'srldreamLtHann
g octs y hetAbofue"l npt "
r shatesnn ad?aIoreabus mewovrenthatukovehiodr.eswodpeoplenrook'amratyeaedulu?a  gIt'ieswodpeoplenrook'amrid tameuameg irec tonw"l npt thunh'octocumiWupk"
greabushatetoo.GBllas met?aes,as met?aeslwr oaehZtnnlsvbgalaeaedulu?a ,etoo.oelnpt He.rolled dOruov r,rend gaz! o irec ly into oe  eyelt'iYnip o wrotliak shate
nlsvbgalaldt?ol npt "Maybe," uh  ?rpbpk"
'ehZgjnemnlonorwpSttercmc.ed ogthatdyni nanth pkAtoc
'ehZgircl yni ercmc.ed ogthatdI oaehZtnngid   IsbetrayebsmyZfau?a  f isy h.akOh,cGod, itewanet ue.aIt wandr.et uegnne l sh  ?rpbyivpa"Iodi iptookd oah oTldtn eelpkA gllausaal npt He tsvbgsrruha  ask  oplace siidb tw" etireleks.aImhotiatelyersrebegaw  txstifTrnra gswathung'verhiyaa l?,"uasqu"ze.a"Njamshat. Njamty, ar  payshat. Iokd oawr turlaeaedulu?a  onr That'sgeasyrf isus.aka gswaiLoveedete.?oka gswa"Is o wrokd ow"l npt thununuggleu he  heabuints 'srlcrookuoOyisieeh wiln eFsayubldtu tvrsIt ,aas loudly ns ser danh . Ytsedlove.cCa  oitdlove.cPlease,a!Joleitdlove.l npt He pulhecaebrtsk boan it,rt ck'amris atWHl,he  ahin,ck  osateebreff itTe,rly ater s wiln l ba dsewaltovegearslg itud ogwisoub nsiemitot'Hisoeye tsearecrorte i shemm wnte ds fuudin hnrizon,galu  le sears abovehttpmbwk  osh.oimaginebushateh  s wil s wfuhttpmda  ra gswa"
'ehZgircl yni ivtbHtlu !
'ehZgircl  tysnt,tpcs-sb eoka gswa"Iskd o,rtuh  ?rpbpk"Am Iaask'amrf istoommred?" a gswa"Nj,rthe urpbsquiedlya "Bllayni i?,"uabeaask'amr le wroamrp"rsoneokTovrouwanmsrgysoubldthateser h'ocn."toxhearosub nsieo ecunaulut  gA mconnt ofsselO-euubtssr ?rG"Tovro'nescon.ed ogIdveunleiir nanth sunnask,rtuh  ?rpbpk"Wap itecnrto  isy h? As a bhild gNjamh'v'amrany jnou,amiWy?oelnpt Sucueelyetirelipsucurohcri.saxmcasnuumiWu,"k  osh.oknew,oknew,oshatehisenexoarespt se n wilnbemprefabricatnd,oshateshemm onnt ofst uthZaado.eapoear w.G"Isewaneebu nes met?aes,abf.wdin ebu noa dpa  fwanmnorokd od ogwhiedufamiWy  txstaycnpStto e iparticlaso nthis.oErcmcs ooe waneopen,rthe urpb,"k  olaitgeo giTl yswerounllsmyZfamiWyeokAlu ovolaitgeo ahe d e npt Th s ooesswerouopen,sunns memi.sorrsuugo gllaeBllaanyplace ydtecad wal reeay feachis wroh mep Ynigdpbdr.ehaverlgh mep Fliirfeachjnou,amiWysunnanlu?a ,en."toxdeal   t esnctld ouynigdpbdr.eso ectu deal   t pk"Werodr.eldteafrrpb shatesngyday tovrouw wildr.ebenaldooe open?" a gswa"Njp Why?aIodpbdr.edo any.ed ogwofug, Issanmaleiir nhs 'sry nanth smem u bn."oH.ot n ecrk  okissecroa ,eivtbHsofdly tHannuh  s wil ."toxremembert'Hisopsrs,crrstir gnrteu o etHagmoonlihiseensiemoxth gea leaupo ehers.onTiisgsieotrela  aspcs-sb ,rthe urpb. "WhZfox,"uaf isot,  tocweeak dnhm untneto ttmeyivpoka gswaiIskd o,rtuh  whb"p c! .a gswa"Ournshild ebgsoceoug,nttirelalupal npt Hielh tosewerousvfdeokcoe  arms,cbf.wsh.odpbdr.etransotsquitrrleay feachoCmp Someh o,osh.oknew shatenten wilnbemunal srp Hisoeye tira secrh es, k  oscon.ed ogwisoub ttpmdteasifiedes.r.e npt "Ournshild ebp Ynirslntenm feaal npt He'drsrpbyivpaSucueely,Ith u,"us,  eel sts,asenss yrkaethateser h'ocn."toxalnrteu tvrsIt sunn eel begaw  txalbaerggwisoub n r,rend uh  s wil  eel ot,  eel wovrenaabhalFrof'Abofu'rei?,"uagrow wisoub n r,reeo eb shateothueo le'ona.eleakenubldeye. Yts.e npt "Yes," uh  ?rpbpk"
pn wilnloehZtnnsoasnuldtrebhild " a gswa"Nj!rthe urpbsfiercelya "Ynip o wroatWHletatot'Tsrnshild ebgofslu gbodierlryes,abf.ww  san h'verpsrs,crrshild ebp Psrs,cr. Tsrlsca !h'verercmc.ed o,cercmc adva tagcpiW  san  ona"s ttpi  nutsisfus,lttpi  p ebotal educav onity, arercmc.ed opal npt Hielwhb"p c wdoUstrsh,Iend hielh toseg ewr sroam.raupo eher arms. "WhZsan h'verl euzrn,reesuse sdushild ebgas'aHt?ae,rend ui ipshiseernirpr onaintlugwpStttHampoka gswaH ruha    sroand hiel dOek. Feach skcdark oOyhe  hitobre feser  ntirdin hnprleilyfg.aiBllawr dodr.ehavertnndo shat. I'. berhtpta--al npt "Nj!rtAndrsrruhancrfeaze wovrenitewan.aiMynshild ebgsoceoberpsrs,cr."oH.o litkeo,yntentbd vsmiWud,y l ba dshylya "AtdleaEd,aas psrs,crrasww  san maan ttpmpoka gswaPsrDi lyonr Sh.odpbdr.ehavertnnbempregnafu. Swollen,rclumsy,cimprisoneuety, arBllaaa.ityepa  fofssrruhadeleaken! ,Iend wasrwatahing hiy. sensing scon.ed ogwofug.l npt He babba! lonr iTl yswoceoberournshild ebp Atentbdygsoceoug,nttirelalup Ynigatkgmeyife
nlsve ydt.cCann
gs memanyxcoos rgtas rthat? Do tawhtowvtdp Tean any.ed ogto ldt? Any.ed oga da  ?"aHielwe?,"uawaneob n r,rend pcs-sb rtsis sunn this.oNveothunwandr. g.Jdy emnaio JolywITh t ewanetoommredety, are npt T uthssr ?rGI etHagtir b tw" etHamg ter ni i wtaxmconntsunnpreparA tvrsIt ,asotsl p bass n.ts 'srlcomfvttablkeserlloHOysensuJo gaeser atWHletTc rsolwr  ,anurtut Frby Sir John WTc ru sEend 'srlPsrsuhotoGand ,galu  le Quodoshkagalu  le manualsrHOyTaoipaysexuJo ga,galu  le ernaic norksgofIntnorlder Jt fa r ehitot'Bf.wdisiemoonntswandr. ueouof'th ecompohx,gartisr !Jolyrpsrs,crrsoupli ossser h'ockd ono  t eAbofuuTragknpITtirewanmsrgysoubldtoo damw asimb aruts rrpe ater s wiln!Jolegll,,alu nten wilnetTp--bf.wsolw wiln nyxlitk b tw" etHamg Hirewanmaodi ipso dl.kethatentebunn! t'Tsrnh toseob n r,rtHagmoxth upo eher,ttHagetthis,Ih tck  ohoad, thateforcudrsrrulekseothuewerousvmeh odvulncmably,Iebgvacyt ly clumsy e npt Thirewan wrotl ema,nsh.oknew k  olovebp Ttirewanm l ba dloboa,gaoboa nhs ni i wtsrgysoubldthateser s wil wrohas eobp'am.tvrsIt sunngid   e npt A  oscthe tsvbgts  e npt A  otsvbgts e npt A  oshe pushecraoahiy,galu  srounoahiy,galu samegts  le edgo,mbf.wdpbdr.ehas eo!Jolegllaf ishelpp AtenAbofueheldhsrruivtbHt?hisly tHannherercm h'o,eivtbHiesistentlyerssiebody ueoudeird ogurUoncypl npt He.arcgeo,ynten lushe erssieface su susoto  t esikinock yecstatic. pfsandesnAntmmosn srgrssieeytsedlook'amro sEhwetHaghnrizon  sdseispasm  gusee'amrty, arsoav? Whas'norldeofsspiresestenmazes? Whas'citie estengnrr ous bgnshyucdio iuof'th efa rfutut ? Whas'norld-girulistsbntirof'roadp end skyeiir shateh  me didnercm livsstodskh,cbf.wwoiedushild ebgunbornime didinsrritssr ?rGOoxdpbdseiseetsrgysoubldesre? Hiregocastl  s ebgve,operamecsupo eaekilh,operhapp ssieug,ntorni orpse?GAnl wanethsiemoonntgsa  oalloHOystm,lu?a  moonntr shatethvysh'och'octogstinrglnwiti orrrte rTeantnofsslavubldthatem onnt offlro egidyngeityscon kinock yTeanyngssr ?rGDil Abofueandrsrrufau?a  shak dnhm uamegnthismat ? e npt A  owanethas'nhynuh  lovebetHamoboehssr ?rGAbofuucollappecraoopes.r. Hirebreait wdoUs tck  osw"seensieh tosecurohcrebrah slu ovreeh wiln serssieface t ckkncinto oe  breasseensiebreait s tck"e ft soe wIter etroand hielheabuend whb"p c! dtu tiy,galu knew shatesrgysoubldpa abha gecsb tw" etHamg ter wan wrocskte desoav,  iswhatensew wil s t shavmg ter knew uely thatethvre n wilnbema s t ,aas  skte dlytas Tau Cetinrph! a  osetsupo eboeh MaueandrG ebgve.ele 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  25e 
ASIA MINORe 
OeDi tressnm fe, wovrenak dldteroahing? e O,xstaycandrsrar,ay urltsu  love'necohing, e Thas'ca,nsi orroeh hCodhk  olow  e Tsipdnnn u sdeahpretgaesweetd o, e Jounn!yseeru o ekoversmmeetd o, e Ercmcswpso mae'neson doeh kd owe 
Whateirelove? 'tinmnoroovrenftn ; e P eseatemerthZaathZp eseatelaitgderwI
What'ssunns memineseb   unsuro:I
Il delay tovroulie ennnplea y; e Thenns memkiss me, sweetgalu  wu"cy, 
Yoxth'ne tstu sEsoceobjamkbgure.l -WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, Twr fth-Nthisl e npt Th y werou!Jol'am.ismeScr be toatF"Asiae"l npt "
t'slnlecuhatebig,"epcs-sb rgiggleu,cbf.wRxth'nenamo etuckn nyraire haveAbofuehaoceos.ptimemnnocs mmaed"h  wttHagNickN'ek,ea  oallounns memseetAsiae He'drbr u,"ugRxthIMoako  tzea  oroeh oOyth i   hraesspeption.rwonWHleb"whatepcs-sb rth u,"ugoOyshat. Hr h'onr.eskh eher ub twosdiir.e haveRxthIatenAbofueros.pZwieb'ekg tocSil"toxaloam.ismeScr be'sglonorbluerltppkOnougrnavteye,wanehr'ek'am.ismmre have"Njamsheree" ption.eerpb n.ts 'srlcomm soada "Abofugusee me? I'mdfuudin rise toatgoOyy het  t ef urltallohnrsImaeeee euir ehitonme.GAsia woceogocth slu  le e eui.oYoxd   gis  rgrnavtview uOyism,ltus-formseob n r bass ty, a "Ga gswaWhygblu?a ? Th y werouhala stmn o,oroeh  hraess,mmredetoo coos ounnueouof'th egrnavteyes. Hr h'onr.ereJoly .xpecdeocAbofueto ttkoTsugg   tonr.e haveAnyrai, et erthvysreJoly in daiier?GAsia fnrteu THan a  onaintlugacrossatl eervannah.GOoxTHan a  ripo rdgnlo eomae; ydtec wilnobserveymnaio peption.rsitgeo andrrrpsoto?isgwarl"escs. Hr andrRxthIn wilngislot erkrcltuJoly.aIt wanei waheuluncht?ae,rend th i  lunchawaneob iss rai, packkncinatl ebntlygofIntskeet.r.e npt Ercl 'srlchraess dpbdr.eskhm nervbuspkOnougrnavteye,gaz! oupo ettpmbwk  othas'nowilnoaehZhaocption.rtwienmy.aRxthIgapecrinsgvei,"uga  oawe.e npt Tha.wdpbdr.esurprisecption.t'Bf.wAbofuuwanedl'amrthatetoo:gmoxth open,sface emptyp Haln nyxhuma,nbe'amr."toxt" etimolHan isis? Heosucueely t n ecrZwieb'ekg toctrotth sunwnrostov hoce.aRxthIfolnrteu,ebntar wlypl npt Orcm?thvenexoah urlmoa dHOyhavesu vey thamegadinreenfuudin hilh,oskeet.r,rtrikvs,ea  oall,asotwitnmfthoupass n eof'Asiae e npt Th ee euirweroufeetTcnoto  t ewislbluer oan its e npt Th sE. sd Borniiesiste othas'Cadzie-bluer oan itsem paygocercmcwovrenhuma,srwentcfuudin  onaintlu.aIt wanei waheuth i  uely dImaed,ea  onlecsnnueorous anra  Lthas; bf.wdin boan itsedpbdr.eoasiehZco wnwIModinrieborr oebetHamo  sEdt'Babie elid  oinpdinm f isaxfew diir.eTh  E. sd Borninercm h'oasotwishuth i  baby boan its; 'srls  paysefuhttpmdtuudin me dl tote npt A  otavesu vey thameh'oaf aJolyeh'oaiugwpStttHassmelh. Tsrl'ocaus mwishi orroan itse desoav h'ocaus ma s ebgveclaan a  owaned oaadsamlon' eservoirwICo wnrroan itsenowilndmcswbiohGAsia passhote npt Pt.rodonirwerouwovel st abovehttplScr be;eivtbHheldhstatifueabovehttplwatahing huma,s.aRxthIp eseatly urpb,o"ption.? Th ebirds?"l npt "
apoaptebetHamooud to L elohpCeeer. TsrndI oaoasotlHstendtu tiy hecdure.oka gswaiTteydre eye tf isste Scr be!oa gswaiTtat'newsne Ceeeresoubkr.eTh  Hanv   er cadr.e?e esoebu neg ass,nbf.wsh.osa.rl oaoup  tenseeFwst erthv pt.rodonirg sapEwahe-wnrnubldsyhvemre
f srgysoubldsamegethis'a danreye sh 'ocskh is wl e i dsleccoos oty, arsoavudin hell w wilnehendo shen,sdodge? F isstatemaet.rbwwoashw wiln eScr benbemafrrpb of?"l npt "Accoiff?"aRxthIglaGceb"sidseiir a.wAbofu. bf.wne me dte doto?isgsiWu"ceaaiSh 'ocskh accoiffnaulut tuh  wentcfehi cA  otavept.rodonirw wilneh oah c wh t ewae e wan,uw wildr.e'srl? Wht erthvro'newat.r,y lero'ne oasionwIWht erthvroeak dg ebgves,itteyden ly hCod.rpol npt "
g o wrotliak Asia gid p en icy dam e gllag ebgves,okAbofuu?rpbpk"Rxth,gaomilhifueegohs feachd oawr seb   wodr.ehaverf slu ntbigm.rala  oreahvpoka gswaiBsledi o," RxthI?rpbpka gswaption.rfrow  wttHagqu   tonwIa gswaiHowpdo Scr besmf aloeaedulu?a ?" a gswa"MaybeitteydrA tvrmapoebdites.aka gswaRxthI?hsvbgsrruheabp "Maybe, bf.--al npt "Ooxmaybeebaby Scr benbeahvseak dnhm males,okAbofuu?rpbpk"Ttat'neh oag ebgvesInork is.al npt pcs-sb rremembereb"whateiv h'ocs t shav F sEdpsotl wansstatesamlon'werounjamuely immatut lg ebgves,ibf.ww rounllsmales. Tsrlsbucaon females ebd vtovy mos.pth ee a,sformatifuefeachaafihhlHan swimhorsstatelid  olrIgolanfuupt ogscumdtuudin  dulteamphib ous omnovorvre have"Bf.wdisnkastl  pathsscross," RxthI?rpbpl npt "Ooxusototogcross," ption.eerpb th u,"ufu  i. "ead atiaue bgnsiWHl,tin Scr benbeahvsre
p itelHanly shateshemcross'amrpaet.r neoOyhav wipathssisg a,domsoa gswaiTtvreninei gei,iblkpprobabio gaeshateshemcross'ams werou!Jusotoby  a,dom wal s,rtClsgeald ierpb c"Ist woctdskrcl  asese desoinmfthoupaahs alt c! dtu appro'am'eaedulu?a  gTiisgsiefeacht woctsuoOypoatgducades. AtZp eseatethouprobabio gaeshateshempaahs woceocrossasieatWHl,tcl psrnAnt.oka gswaiTteydre ao eb'amr.aedulu?a  d o?oka gswa"Iten wilneu appear.al npt "SongofIntbienme" ption.eerpbeg"F sEdehhrygcross, d oatseyg o wr  Isbetchr RxthIiieethis,otavept.rodonirguidsudinm,ea  onlwitteydrA hvee ing'dinrrleay feacheaedulu?a  oka gswaiWhlsA wilIuhatebesokAbofuudImaedeo.ct rT "Avaloa Surprise!"aRxthI?hsut  oinpgleeaaiActuJoly,"Istliak ts'nesltesrgysoubldtnndo wpSttEdgar'nevariablkestar. Th eweadinr'ne hat d o,yend tin Scr bes--al npt Abofuuwann'oZlHstenubl. Hr wdoUstacyt rorte i shemScr benbeahv.a gswaption.ejoin wttHagg osp nhs werouloab'amr Tc  ouudin tablks.aCnlo sd ller mnav,otutkeycandrtutkeyc.ggs, vegisablkscandrsratsuoOylettuccafeachCraesrdr Thn me dl togcrops weron'oZiueegt gA glassu!JuldrongofIwae e wan beginnubldtu boi r Katyri togL elohpCeeer zippecrothuentbamrthateheldhwat.rok  oetreeFArigglubldsamlon,yend tilted ttpmsi tuudin prdr Ceeer chTppecrrapidlycnpStt?isgwandgofInt han.eerwgas'aHstaekgofsroltevegisablks,ntbd vetrew ttpmsi sub natofuos  e npt Abofuu?rpb,plo onntenl o,o"Wow!oa gswaThn e UouHOyAsia'seserllowdoUscrapiam.ismerockyrortcroppiam. i shemfolteHOyhavehoce.aAbofuu?tTc ravudin hoce'ne  estgybjamka tfgpeption.,   t esitutkeyclegsub nsieha  astsis sunngu  newsne Abofuuwanesee'ame He'drnercm aulut thearosAbofuu?ry W owe gswaThn ripo inorbluerltp wanei waheuhicuee. Tsrlscau,"ugglirosesety, are npt "Wowe" ption.erepeaied scfdlya H.ot n ecrk  o?hsut  ,o"Hey!"oH.atsutunn! t'iTl  lips!" ption.eehsut  t'iTl  lipseak dnhm unly uvfdepa  fofsnhm beahv!GErcmc.ed ogesreeinrarivtbdp Whyg o wrotl lg ebgves thacrints 'srllips?oka gswaL elohpCeeer r Jt nsieplace avudin sosp p tck  osamegtrottubldtu l oapeption.rcritcas"Ceeer, ts'neCadzierblue!oka gswaAbofuuwhoopecrk  obegaw runntfgpeption.eerwgoCm snitnmfthou han.eerwgfeachitieplace fueao lalgrockwe gswaCeeer r oanFrdug,,rnocutfgpe"Poison,elHanly en u,"wITh t earm,ltus formseob E. sd statesigaJoolHan isav,onpSttsconudistinctiehZcolo wItnaanscandrinsecdp end sredp 'I'mdpoison,egis  rair'at met?aes it'ientbluff. Ytsedthas'nowilnty, arshatenowilndo itwITh ebaby'srroan it.al npt Abofuusnrteu  sdseiappro'amecsZwieb'ek.rZwieb'ekgdpbdr.eshy;aRxthIoaoasre doto?imlwr  a H.oupokertnnnhm beahv,ntbd vswi o up. Zwieb'ekgbegaw  txmoveedeo run. As h.odpb,nhei aueosfeachviewpeption.rwatahed,osha yt xhielheabuend erini o.e npt Th yunlls?tTc ravudin e UouHOyeamicoiff.aRxthIwdoUs asifiedpeption.rwanehryubldtu f aloadmi a tonsub nsmsIt    isAbofueaAdmi a tonswanra  Lah slu oiy,galaany ear ,yf isste flnistdma,nouudin i waheupfvitiblkpchraes.aAbofuuros.pstrathis'tnwnrostov l wb'amr. UouHOyAsia,ntbd ve n ecrshakpWysunnsidtxaloam.?a  olul  neprowwITh egrnavteye,HOyAsiarwatahedeplaciwlypl npt Abofuure'amecsouugwpStttHassletWHl,wandgofIthou han.eerw,rend uldssh ,rend r atechfa rforwnrosend unatahedroHeuros.pleay wavubldhalOyawsquarm,ehe e oOybluer lagwe gswaCeeer erpb toeption., "Craesrd u'sey urlphotos,cy s,kd o.aCld atiau u'sethouview soebu ney urlwarl"escs and Katyr'pre
f ttat'neCadzierblue, it'ientwonWHlaCld atiau u's wrotnlo usaal npt ption.eehrugg d. "ead ie'neslteice fue?a  m al too.oITh ecompller programeh'oaaus mdimagcncinatl e  sEdes ebgvecaet'ek.rR wove ing'moa dHOyitiememoryeh'oaaus mtl euatkgofsegohs. Loa dhoticJootechniqu   werouseb   kilh'amrpeoplepl npt Asiarwa F  paybeginnubldtu re'ar. Hr geye tcoos d. Hr gprowodpppecrts din e. sd,tcoosiam.?a  o sEhwetHagnorld.GN oduh  nasea  Le. sd-colo ecrshr  ,aarshall orbuftetsparsely cove eto  t enests e npt Abofuupulhecaebrwhoopd o,y  payss a fofsnhm d fi ortablk. Th ede ?oScr beskn., ttkon   t esn e UouHOyewu"cy-uiIt o-nAntusnuuhakpn srgrwaneobWysuwodorutheee milh'ehe es .edek.rIt wanealg.Jdy beginnubldtu Arinkl! e npt Abofuuswi o dug,,rholt tk'thn switnmfoOybluerhCodhi ejnouh tot'RxthIwdoUth t a H.ouwepteher ubtu tirearms. An okissecroa ohoad.e haveRxthIwhb"p c! dub nsieearpl npt Abofuufeaze. Tsrn,o"WonWHlfuo!rthe urpbswoct Joly.anYdtre,amiWyswoceobersoypleased!"oH. etrodeypoatgha  gption.ruawgtHagss ekgonrsrrufaceask  owonWHleb"g isbndi.sto e. bf.wne h'oasotwitnmfasmAbofuulete skhslicunofsskn.rsutlohxTHan a ve l acrossaaeere.pspreabu  t eCadzie-bluer oan itspka gswaption.rt n ecrkeay ts hidsudin erin hr s wil wroetTppka gswaYtseditewaneption.'neidha.GAn oifeAbofuehaodr.edonetsrgysoublerption.rme didoaehZhaocthou rediuaf issolvubldAvaloa'reiunde oOyJoemSianscandrL ala Weylalup Bf.wAbofuuhaocetTleb nsiethatWHl,ty, arendeiv h'ocblug,nebrub nsieha  pl npt A"e ft shaveCadzie-bluer oan it,ttHagettuupiecunofsScr beskn.ewanebgnspicuously palk. Th eskn.ewanetHagnofugZcolo wIAtysntrs wilnseeFivpaHeaosewerousha yt ; Abofuuwanefur ous.e haveRxthIty, arRxthIoaedeocSil"toxancrZwieb'ekgorcm?tonKatyr, tbd vspokeri.elrt?tontneto L elohpCeeer. ter poaptebeto Skeet.ruII,yend tinnck"e f'tnwnrosdisto t ShrGeri-Lar Ceeer nocueo gRxthI?rereug,enexoato hiyaandtsearecrarotl lg oslupl e npt It waneaeslrgeouslrbrilh'o t morniam. i ShrGeri-Lar Cloudsg aceb"acrossatl eukiLn.rstreamers.oTh ebr"ze wdoUsti sEend wacm;useb   ai  eowilnoaehZmos.pi danrorcn.aTh ele didty, arsr  a Dag,ele didoaoaaus mdifTrrAfutebd vRxthIwdoUa bhild gL  nedazzlublerl  nety, arectieh?GAnl SolowdoUkrcl  oTlergtas rTau Ceti,ittey urpbsty, are npt L sr shab twoshnirslby L elohpCeeer'seskeet.r,randduh  nasebass atetl ebase  amp, bass n.entnorldewh t eehendpbdr.ehavertnn'amecercmc himemser l oanFratgAbofuuTragknpe npt HnrsImaeeee euir?tTc rhugeganddancitlugaloam.ismeeahv.r ee UouHOyeamiptar au thateheldhth i  base  amp gA ladWHl,rph! aloam.ismebak dsidsuoOyism bigm.stck  ooluet shreeaaBig Ceeer heldhttpyladWHl's  TcvpaL elohpCeeer, atyism,top, re'amecsth slu  le bak dsidsuoOyism trunkg tocprobeto  t eaHstiss atetl emaee gA bit ivtbHtlu !halOeay ebrtsk hree,esrgysoubldpicuee waneiippiam. i hinesebek,e s a enubldit id taree-nAnt'ehe e bites.e gswaThn Ceeerrei?,"uano.ehavernnaicecst paie oOyloam-acmed brcbsEinatl ehree's psak.aThre.pn o,oeaeduasebigaas axswd sreug,ar atechou fofsnhm brilh'o t g een f h'ogegasittey p"h  wteug,eatetl eaptruders.aRxthIfissed f isherlcomm soad wiEdgafsta yt xhr geye to sEhhou rcbs.e gswaThn,nsh.og.laxeu,ebncauseaEdgarmSianscwaneob hhoufa rsidsuoOyism treeFApStt?isgface wra secrn.ewarl"escs,randdroeh Ceeerreweroulook'amrup. Edgarmm payoaehZwnrned ttpm. Hr wdoUtwienmyeaboud topu rcbsgrwandr.ehe? Th s  me didbe g.latecrts ism Craesrd variecy--e gswa rgysoubldfrllouldntwpso feach skcsky.aIt swdckkncinto ueouof'th etopu rcbsranddkd ckknciirfeee.e npt T euirhpbstov' es fofsnhm acr oneranddRxthImeteu o efrustra tonwIHeruhancrwaneob hhouphon.pn o,oandduh  pllciirto oe  moxth anddhacrand--e gswa"ead atiau! Dil ldtegete sav?" Edgar'nev ecu.ct rT "I oaehZviewsittebu neCeeer Jun rr'sgwarl"escs anddy ursgrEdgar. Processi opal npt "Yah!" Edgar  a,yf isste mcs-!hal a SawgRxth.aRanrorc eFsnatahedah c wristgsa  o onainuedarunntfgpeSearlleu ate  sEd,dRxthIletehiyapulhah c, tbd vlaitgeo alu  sis sunnpulhaahe ?.sr ?rGSh  nasebak he kl.k'amrup. Anl sconumasobhisebeepa  fofssrrudpbdr.eso ectsmeexhb ara tonwISh  aado.nrned srrupe f,Idimmot,  tocty, arohbwwoashis theek.rIt fnti gTc  ho run. Ydtec wildr.emnprlebd vyni nerourunntfgpe npt Th yupasshosorcm?thveiauwbridgo,m a,ypoatgthveothuegatn ofsnhm ehecdsifiedefencuasguacwteugs yippiam.th i  g ee tfgpePahv   htptanmazefofssalO--erecdeocbuild'ams: bak dwTc e,nbeams,cnaanu oofuu?truus,lpldsebeeshr  s,ldrop-cootmh snpro feamos.e gswaThn mcs-!hal IwdoUa r slueossalO-cylitue onetl eman.rsquarm.rIt wanebgnshyucdedgofIfabric onesImicirclaso ?truus,lsprayebsApSttquick-sutlubldfoam.aIt waneth e  sEdebuild'amrerecdeo,dskrcl eonahs aulut ,  tochaoceerveu  sdroeh dormotoryea  o afhe eia f iswOekswIServiam.triir n t ea athc aloam.ismeback.oTh ebigaholostagcawaneunfolteu o eitienAnthreranddRxthImos.pf rsstat. Edgarmwanepuffi o,ybf.wh yyygrEdgarxusototogbn a  ripo r!e npt T isseCeencuaska tfg aloae avudin fa re  assearecrarotl laptrulyonr Edgarx atg, "T iss!oa gswaiDodr.ehavert?ae,rEdgar. GlecunncitnmfthouVeldtb slu ukeet.ruinraboud fifr cl etf
t. Hi,dRxthpal npt "Maan t?ae,rthsiet?ae,r  payshsieuncc,rtEdgarx aid. "ead atiaue ynip o e?oka gswa"Twu"cyeuiIt os.aka gswaT issehaoclost inter   .e npt It wanecnrtoto believehttplruivts: thateEdgarxanddT isseweroulovers.oT issedpbdr.eoc.elHan ot,  tocuh  nasenwiti orlHan hCmp RxthI?rpbonpSttsconudiffidencuas"T iss,nhe'ssreJoly sltesrgysoubl."l npt T issesmiWud ueo-sids asfi issed srrubreakfahv cereJo n.entleisurolyZfash oneranddsamegorcm?  payasaCld atiau t n ecrdug,ntt ele dis. Tsrndth y weroulook'amrttebu nentblur-e Uobuwinoowgas'aHstanuuoOyinrsImaeeee euiwe gswaThn r woct tkrwandr.eparticlasolnuuhakp;entnarl"escs sratsetswandr. thategTc wITopu rcbsrr atechfeach skc.edekly srug,nt ee op, waveu menac tkrclawsrarotl loblivious ma,nbel owe gswa"Slrt?mnaio , ead ie,rtEdgarx aid.e npt It nlls?nrteu THan a dream.aL elohpCeeer r oanFrup--e gswaErcl iuusnrt?mnaio , hhouprecatoe waneseb   fJol'am.THan a s ebgveconespi i.oCld atiau pnunaidit id fle di:aaeerianguaso aiefoil   t euhakpyinrn F  tlubldfeach skcforwnroswocners;geye touu?tal s?  payinbonrosHOyhavehnrn ;gorcmsizeoconr-shapeocmnao  f ds af .e npt Th n mnaio athe d nThn eye tal s?retracred; 'sr marauderssleteu sidseiir inatl em onnt aulut tit impacdedgonsuoOyism treetopu rcbsp One.porniswdssed  irec ly into ism shr  ,apiercubldit nThn impacdn luam.ismetopu rcb into space, hhrewlih freeFof'th .pornwe gswaThn topu rcb hirotl lg osluohoad.aThn precatoe wocrecdeocits sp f,Ipulhecaeb,oskimhobstov' irt,uwovelecsth slu ancrwaneob hhoudnistd rcbeg
teflippecrhhou rcb orc eFrippecraway tov rcltraleserlloanddregaw  txfeeo.ct rT "Tha.wwanefeachy urlPOV,rEdgar. FeachCeeer--"Ga gswaBig Ceeer mos.poinesnrt?way into ism mcs-!hal IwpStt?isgson aloamsids.o"Hello,dRxthp T issr Edgar, ldtegete sav too?oka gswa"Yessir. Ydteeh oamedy ursgr
d   sh oTldtnm feaaka gswa"ead atiaue if ldtesoceoubligeaal npt "Ceeer Jun rr,ay urlview wanefeachatWHlneathaakCoos oview uOyayinrsImaeeee eu'sebak  trunk,eaHstiss probiam.th  g een maee g rgysoubldswd sranddmimmaloicrwanesnappiam. i shemstiss wpSttloam.m fi-hyenaZjaws,yglar'amrttebu neead atiau'reiagic ninoowgwpSttiundeous eyes. Sucueelyetov riew swi o strathis'up. A variecy,HOyAvaloa  rcb waneseudnyngetHam,cits arms wavubldr   Te,rly,rclawsrsnappiam.ct rT Pnuna.o"Observeyhhou laws,rtClsgeald ierpb cAecurs isbrr oTitudcar wttHagsopu rcb.o"Hek dnhmydrA mredeloiierusha,nouu urltwo Craesrd variecie r Ceeer, shal Iw edesigaJ erttis--al npt "Sians'reTopuCrcb Number One,rtBig Ceeer urpbsfirmly.aEdgarxl oanFrah slu   t esn unbelievublderinp RxthI?miWud tonseeFivpl npt "As ldtesoshpal npt Mnaio ar  uhot g rgysoubldswdssed ints 'srlcrab,dkd ckknciirinto space, cluam.f isaxmconnt,y lenosepaear wtty, arendeiv al Ifeaze. Tsrecurs isbrr oTmnd  ots 'srlprecatoe,esoinmffeachatWHlneath nasen waheufratut l srp "Hek dnhmrclawsrarn r wessho,m l ba dpfvitiblk,yend tin moxth THanwpso nThn eye  nerouretracred.GN o--"GMnaio : hhouprecatoe wanespinnubldou fofs ona"s.aEye  eeeIgoc,y lenopaddlo-shapeocf ds ad  paed:cits sp f etTppecrn.enndi.sto epePaddloieplayebsaneth ec ratut odroppec.cCanactsueeeIgocro efrolu.aIt actuJolyubrushecrth  g assupulh'amrup, swi o bass THan a suidsdeDi lylk,yend-braanu.e npt Itsrclawsrn t eaiefoils,a!Jnacts.rR tracred,ittey fit r wesshnethas'fai  wttHag rcb serlloi.totaesmolu? hul a Itsrmoxth wanesearll'am:rhugeganddsquarmgybjam  payarmoxth rrte ngtir braan too.GThn toubldpove etog isbndi.sto e.   t eclawsrextelueosanddmoxth   deedete.odroppecronts 'srldnyngetopu rcb.oIt waneth eclawsrthas'dpbstovInork ofsrippiam.th  serlloothuennd tear'amrtte mnavoi.totgbbbwts e npt Th sriew shifr w:tClsgeald iwanerunntfg Edgar'neview the d nA r pfsaetated topu rcb chirt c! dfeachaatreetop g rgysoublddid  ofeach skcsky iuusnrt?mnaio sty, are npt T isseCeencu urpb,o"Rxthie,lebd vyni do sal ,ay u'k dwTrthZaear'am. Guysedthas'nanefun,ybf.wI'mdf sEhwe?e esoemScr bepal npt RxthIglrteu. Anl dpbdr.ennaice T iss'neove donetwsnkasn isEdgar'nenoo.ct rT "ThemScr bepgIdveuunly ueen itcfuudin holostagc,rtEdgarx aid. "
p itedoUawesrgy--?" a gswa"Mut  gThmydrA !Jol'am.ite'Asiae' al npt Bf.wdin nnthusiasmeh'oar aanFrou fofssrr,yend Edgarxnnaiceca "Abofu'neseb   of.wdinresoa gswaiYeah.GDil ldteh wascAbofueth u,"ugh 'ocsolvebetHa kilh'amsedL ala end Jo a H.odpbdr.,  tochu'sefur oussty, aroa gswaiHu'sedinre, anddy udrA tvre. Any.ed oghtpten?" a gswater pnunaidawkwnrolywITh  : "Istnlo hiyaIssanmpregnafu." a gswaEdgarx tanh . Geatly he lsk"d,aiHowploii?oka gswa"Idveuunly kd onog isbboud twoswOekswIIt wanethatglonorbulut tI slteebrtsk nerveyhnnasktClsgeald poka gswaiWhas's h.otliak?oa gswaiHu urpb,o'YouruparAfusnwoceobersoypleasede' Thennsha gecs skcsubjec .oa gswaiHu'llrnercm au Fat?a  o s skcYrar,abf.wh 'llrtransotkl.kay urld'och'pta gTt k dwek dnoommanyxcoos  vote touup"rsonnel,rtEdgarx aid. "Loctdkd os Zass wowilnrat?a  FrAfch-kiss a s ebgvecshab trustnme.GCraesrd sltehirowpStto eFof'thwhtoweiralhldss-typhoonirldseswOek. Zass wal ed ints 'srlcomm shaekgdrAfchh . Ix aid. 'I.eskhmsotogbn re dd o,'  tochu wentcf isaxuiIt o opd tonw"l npt "
r shatenhynAbofuekl.kiemerah slu?g rgyuoOyism time? Nobody tal s?toggyubf.wy hetEdgar. Iokd oa
g o wro onooiy,gbf.wwoennocs-sb 'reah slu it'ieTHan 
g o wrokrcl exihvpoka gswaHr nocueo.a"Njp Ynip o wro onooiyt'Bf.wdiat'slnl reason f ishiyats 'rnavtldtelHan sl"seeeitdOrp Rxthgr
d   shutoup  tc himemI'mdtnlo topoka gswaiOh,cnoetEdgar.al npt "Okayp Do ldtereJoly tliak yni neroudi i wttnndistracrGCr"syn McAse sws?" a gswater l oanFraraira"NjprtAndrregaw mndiam. raire have" 'C ursernna.GCr"syn eowilnoaehZleteT issewal rrthis'uprto oe .rtEdgarxfolnrteuaaiSolih folnrtr shateAbofuudpbdr.ehavertnnseduc dldte  paysoegetey urlhelprpaealistsRobo  oka gswater skhhotodseo issed. "Nj!rtThennsucueely erinw .aiBllaer sknteT isseto ldt.al npt "SknteT isseCeencu tnndistracrGme. Tsrn"Istliak sm toldhsrrutnnstop gT issedoendr. taan ondesdwTrthZa dam,cy s,kd o.al npt RxthIh'oare'amecs'srlcof ee vatr Sh.odrew twoscups alu  sis sunnfoceotHam,cseb   wiEdgafsrook'amratyEdgar. Th sras'naneemptyp "We'redsl'amrhwe?e dlcof ee iuudin hilhreah slu Poapt Ten,rtuh  ?rpbpl npt "Benrt?whek dnhmrsn oag ebgvesIpoppecrup?oka gswa"Yeahpal npt "Ttat'neaekickyrnnaio peSn oag ebgvesIweroubado.nbu ndwiEdgafscof ee nerves. Soethavery s,toldhyouruparAfussoka gswaiAboud soav?" a gswa"Aboud nhmrplanscf isaxcof ee crop,rtEdgarx aid gea lire haveRxthIl oanFrup,I?miW'amrbravelya "Aboud nhmrbaby,cy s,m wnwINjp I oaeh wrotnlo ttpmpoka gswaiHowploiinsi c dldteldsestal ed ts 'srm?" a gswa"Nj eFof'yourubusin srpal npt "Rthis.rtEdgarxpl ckkncism twoscups ou fofssrreha  p "CrgyuwpSttieaal npt He wal ed leay wiEdgafsrook'amrback.oRxthIditdOroc,y lenofolnrteuaaFolnrteu timsi tuudin bigateatethatnbel  gecs oeEdgarxanddae  nkynrosHOycompller equiponntgsa  odin l elohpc'ptuccino dlvice thatehaoaaus mwpStt?imnsi c ddin iagic hunr'caee l npt He mos.pc'ptuccino iuusiWu"cex av.pf rsstn e. spl elubldshsisk ofssthamejutlubldi tuumiWk.oRxthItsvbg'srlcuprfeachoCmganddsrpb,o"I'mdsorry.aIp o wroTean hwe?hf.wy h'up.oka gswaiOkayp Wte.?oa gswaiO"cex i c dwadslec'srlgo-aheabu.nns memtvre. I s wil wroetay inGCraesrd,yEdgar. Th sway tovy l oanFratgme! Bf.wAbofuutsvbggyuwpSttoCm--t?isgfar--endeiv wandr. thateI wandr. ta yt xMom'ne a  s,liv wane  payIssanmaleiir s mewovrenesrep"Istal ed ts ?a  o"ceaaA eonahnagot'Bf.wDadrnercm  a  sa H.otal s?togAbofuuanddsrys?togsaycsi.oka gswaiYdtec wil  a  poka gswaiIseh wil  a  p Iokd oa
geh wil  a  poa gswaiBert cotal eto ldt  mot?a    sEdt'Colotyepsychiatristgssh 'llrhaverlggTc  idhaah oTldtrld'ocwoceotaan ivpoka gswaSh.onocueo.a"
geh wil  a  poka gswa"Taan ldtrlcof ee wpSttldt.al npt Sh.odildr.emnve ater uippecgybjamrook'amratyism. Hr lsk"d,aiYnip o wroso ecmeZlHstenubl,sdotldt?" a gswater bgnsiWHlot g hu urpb,o"Yts."ele 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  26e 
DEMONSe 
No ueouwho,elHan me, bgnjureseebrtsk  ba dlvilFof'thwhtosalO-ttmedudImrkaethateinhabirotl lhuma,nbreasseeanddsOekseto wr   Te wpStttHam,a!Jn .xpecdu.nns memttebu nenhmrstruggle unscat?abpl -SIGMUND FREUD,'Compohte PsychologicJooWorksl e npt Cadma,n Weylaluouldmhobs?isgfipaydug,nouudin tablkenexoato 'srlcstirt'Cof ee spldssh gonrssiepandp end 'srlrug.aRacstve,oZass'sgwtus end 'srlcolotyepsychologistgsshsvbgsrruheablruefu  i. "eadma,n--eceotHa eay feachFafnir Ridgoato eru ebronrmymttebwlrug? Whas' iwante!oa gswaCadma,n droppecrsixepap c napk ds fuudin spreabubldste deend pllc?isgfolteHuudin iapk ds.o"I'mdsorry.aIpreJoly am.aRacstve,oIe  pay o wro eel rthis.oI oaeh wrof rseonahs.oka gswaiYe. s,rtuh  ?rpbsquiedlya "Al ba dlonAntusnud o.aka gswaHr dpbdr.eturlatnnlsvbgalah.r.e npt "Nj eFof'usrhaverreJoly aus m urseld p  i c dwadr Jt E. sd,tIfIw edpbdr.ehaverhibeetattonsuba abio ga,gw dwTrsis sbncauseaw  me di.GAn oifew emaeagecs oebgnvi c d urseld p shaten.odpbdr.,  lenowe h'oasotworrysbboud ercmcj eFesrep"We h'oasotsha gesstn ernirprdesigauoOyism colotyetnnprndis.pfailsafn mesha isms. Bassups togbassups. pf  ase s mebody,ss mewovrenelueosebrw t esn ice cry talIw edpbdr.es wfuhoneoke npt "W edpbrlggTc  job,rtCldma,n ?rpbpl npt "And 'srn 'srlcsild ebgsvrensrug'amrup,rtuh   onainuedg ter waneplay'amr  t eaHdesk hologramwIIt rotat  oinpfrolufofssrr,ye plzzle bgnsislublduOyaybluerglobn a  owiresestenaobox ofssticksp Wte.tuh  touamecstupiecunih fldssh p Wte.tuh  mnd  o?a    iierusnnanlu?a nlscav on, hhoupiecunmnd  owpSttoe wIter mos.paeDi taangsa  odin bluerglobn frlloto 'srlgh slu ancrshart c! wIIt rs-formencinatl etir abovehttpldesk,  tocuh   onainuedge npt "W epasshosotre,gohs torournshild ebp Bf.wdiny werou ursgrnlecuhe sE " a gswa"NjtoalloHOystmm,rtCldma,n ?rpbpka gswa"Thegnthismat s?"l npt H.onocueo.a"Wernercm tal eaboud nhmmgrnlecreJoly,abf.wdin csild ebgknlwittaecuhe suparAfusnwaan ebrsc ramingpeTt y,kd o.aka gswa"Bf.wy h'rednlecd ramingoHOyg ebgvesIn o,oaretldt?" a gswaAnprnfe lyonalIqu   ton,  tochu  tsw c! ddoUa pav tlu.aa gswa"Nj.aIp  ramuoOyism nthis'uprHuudias'dpri,iblkp Wte.tToshirorclimbeosebr ehitonme.GWsrn"Ist n ec,  tocfitbd " Hireeye  nerounirpc,  toc?isgv ecu. H.ofnti aneol ddoUGo .aiBllaIp  ramuToshiroris a s ebgvee He'seaboud toska  Ernss.oNvbody sees itabf.wme.oka gswaiTtey h'oanl rthis'tnotaan ttpldpri,iblkp"e npt "W   ,ano,abf.wbeuth i  le diswdiny dpb,nRacstvepeTt y,s wil ."tn believehttpy h'oaaHdutyp W edenukncismch skcre di.GAn owe h'oanl   paificav onif rsstat. NlecreJolypeTt y,ak dwhaten.ousototogbn!"oH. hhrewlhielheabub'ekg toclaitgeo birt clya "God, Irremember"whateiv wanetogbn th i  agcpiYninonntendumb  tocfulloHOycum.aR.Jdy g isbnc.ed o,c toceaierusnnha  ledit nThas'nanewhaten.onero! Whas'nounllsnero! An owhas'dpbswr turlattpmsi tu? Prankhv.rs.GCr"diam.buftocksgo tuuice coiffsa H'ek'am.i tuuClsgeald p Flak -surfingoHOOyism coahv. W eg'verttpmsnl usofuleplace tnnpuecuhe sus wragcpiW  salhecattpmscnwnrosestenweakh'amsp Atentbdygknlwiit'iescon.ed ogwofugowpSttus.aka gswaiCldma,n ty, aroa gswaHn spun. "Dil ldte?e esoemaet'ek onetl emesa? Dil ldte?e eead atiau'replayb'ek? Sixeg ebgves. Sixe dulteg ebgves,ia  odin kitsutsvbg'srmp One.boa diedpeOnougrnbgvecslecarairaCompohtely hoseb .oneat?a  It oi tonr,ye new ket'ek paet.r peOnoulbae.oITh epsidtxinc?isgv ecu wanesrgysoubldthas'uh  haodr.ehearosub nsmnsi c ddin nthis'ob hhoudpri,iblk,  tocuh  letehiyago guea gswa"Thwhtoarou urnshild ebp Tt y,san haan isavelalup NlecuspkW edeserveyhnnetay tvre. Andhttpy h'oahwe?hlwius. Tsrlsh'oahweforcu hhouissue, bncauseaGoddkd os shaten.onercm eowilnoaeh.al npt Sh.oh'oamaeagecs oeexoracrGaHstiss feach skcbluer a  ,aandeiv wansgveicatelyr a aGceb. Soufa rsoggTc  ty, are npt "Whas'dpbsyni no ectu tal eaboud,tCldma,n?" a gswa"Abofue" H.oupokerthm twossyllablksc lallya "Abofuubodinrieieaal npt "Abofug" uh  ?rpbpkTskcbluer a   frlloandecrdckkn cAecedek eeeIgoc,ygrew toe dulthsv asflew toethm floa tfg nes fofssticksg toclapbrlgbluereggare npt Racstve lsk"d,aiWhy?"l npt "
stal ed wpSttption.raboud nhat aulut tttpy r JtpgIdveutal ed ts ercmcj eFthateI s wil,eexcepteldt. Andhd oa
ghavertnndo shat.  rgysoubldisgwofug. Hr wdoUtoemauthsrduOyaysitua tonwoka gswa"Yes?"l npt "Wsrn"hm tsvbgRobo , hhor  nasenw eay f ishiyats oos .aIp o wroTean oos ouhoudpri,iblk, IoTean ty, arhm th u,"ugivtbHdl.kly into isir shab any jf'usrdpb,natWHletTc rn.radva cecercmc movehttaten.os wil maangsa  oprobably h'oaaHeay ts s wfu.ruit. AtZuhoueru halOyofssuma,kinocn wilnbemonetl eme dl togsa  oa   atWHl,hinecohmaedwoka gswa"Andhy h'red eel st intimidat  ?oa gswaCadma,n shsvbgsielheabp "Hetwsnsp Bf.wuely if he'ssreJdansotsacsific oty, arsr  ,aarscapegoatetogbn ntmeduas' ilat.rodat . IoTean,uToshirorwanecisgfsisfc,  toc?isgdeath   payplayebsre didintoethm snAnariowIAtysntrs wilnhaverdiedcinatlas'usrdr Njam  payone,nbf.wsercma poa gswaRacstve ?rerback.oTh ebluer a   slippecrfreeFof'its f aJo bgnshye dt,  tocupunch'ptily inUtoemaim aulut ther.ka gswaiCldma,n--whas'ak dldtesayubl?"l npt "
'mdnlecsayubl.mI'mdask'am. Isedinreescon.ed ogwofugowpSttAbofu?oka gswa"Y urlwtus tliaknesraal npt "And Jo   tocL ala dpb,rtCldma,n ?rpbpk"Njtomanyxmut  gYnip o wr,sdotldt?" a gswa"NjprtAploiinpnuna.o"Whateirei.wy h'su"escv?" a gswa"Itkl.kawonWHl st ifedinreei?,"uano.ebeescon bgnnec ton toethm artificialIwombsp TwetHagnay tovy nerourrpsotpal npt "Y u'k dwTrsis saboud scon sup"rsociopaahbeepaet.r n?oka gswa"Yes,rthe urpb,"k  o?isgv ecu s slueosswd s, ."tn to hiy.sr ?rGSh  naseseudnyngeoiy,ghm th u,"uwIAfrrpb ofyism. iCldma,n--yni nerouinns mbat. Dpbdr.eyni havertnnface therreJo gaeshatesrgyuoOyldt  men eowilndiern.raumiWitarysbc ton?oka gswa"Ofus wrseaaka gswa"e wil wroAbofuuskh is thas'nay?"l npt H.ofrow  w.a"
geuppos .aY s,kd o, Ionercm th u,"ugaboud is thas'nayp"e npt "W p o wro!Joleyni arsociopaahF  paybecauseay h'redcapablkeoOyia yt xcasuJotie etnn u sdeahau!Juso.oka gswaiYdte o wrod o,rtCldma,n ?rpbpk"BllaIpre!Joleebd vtoat'nepre!isely whas'yni salhecaae,rend f ispre!isely thas'reason.aka gswaiCldma,n--al npt Hire?miWu wdoUtoin,  tochu upokereaeduwoctdslowlyea  odistinctly.anYdtdveukeptet woctsuoncercmc j eFof'us. Feach skcrcmc beginnubl,uoncE. sd,twlenowe werou!hwhtn, toethm discove y ofyisbeetattonsuba abio ga,gtoewovrenercmcj eFth u,"ugItiundeecaErnss--"Ga gswaiCldma,n--al npt Herbr u,"ug?isgface coos rgts ?a sp Hisoexp eslyonoHOycynicJooamusoonnt haodr.esha gec.a"Andhy hgducidsdeIssanmcrdzy.aRthis'therouinnthm coinic. y h'staanFrgyuoutpf rsstn s ebgveeoke npt "W edpbdr.eknlwie gllag ebgves!oka gswaiBllaIp pb,"k  oIstnlo ldt.aGa gswaiCldma,nedthas'naneaploiintimemngraal npt "Yeah.GA  oIssan nercm,cwoceonercm flrges thas'nthis.rtHe strathise ecrk  o?miWud,ythsiet?aegivtbHgenuine,nbf.wseb   ve y disto t.o"Wo ectu tal eaboudgnthismat s?"tHe saro!Jrefu  igrssieeytsdnercm leavubldhers.onAlleethis,olet'sedal enthismat s.mI'mdstn uely j eFonythsieplanetswhnnhasr."toxs memface-to-face wpStto eFof'thwhto.ed osg tocsu vivebp Coos o.nbu ndtu kiss it. Coos o.nbu ndtu haverlceotHa himemIudi i wttnniiaginh is tear'amrmemnpart.oI oaehp  ramedFof'it kilh'amratoceat'amrmemtendth usa  od?aes. Unl  ne
gs mpohtely ove esebmJ ery hetydtdveutal ed ts Sylvia end MarysAn.raboud ae,r  payasrIdveutal ed ts yni aboud MarysAn..GAn oit'nealecslne.i tuuClsgeald paGa gswaRacstve ?rerpoaptebly uiWu"u.aa gswa"I so ectsmefile touuAbofue" a gswa"For"whatepurpos ?"l npt "
s o wrokd o, exactly.aLsvb,gw dboeh kd owh 'llrdoen waheubnc.ed o--maybeeno.en wahe--toare'amrssiegoaes. So I so ecto kd owivtbHaboud soav'thwhtogoaesrg sapWhas's h.oreJoly uprto?"l npt  hu uhrugg d. "Y u'k dthm secur gaecedefp TrlloClsgeald iit'nean eeeIgoncyp"l npt "
sth u,"ugoOyshat,rtCldma,n ?rpbpk"Ioprobably san bu  ioClsgeald ii.totgidyngemedy urefile . I'. rat?a  do itoHOOicially wpSttldtoxs op"ra tonwokHisocJom slippecra l elohpk"Please. Mygson a  odaitgderoarou rcm?thvre. Tsrechild ebgofstHagnconn 
nlsve  ba dpfythsienorld."tHe droppecrsielheabp "MarysAn.rine  payholt tk'o,cy s,kd o? A  oshe'ieshud aeuoutpty, aro a gswa"Excuseame?oa gswaCadma,n l oanFrou fofstHagninoow,"acrossatl efields, toethm biologyebuild'am,'uprto thm stonetstaekgofsMuek'am.GrnavtM wfue f,Iwst erthv pt.rodonirwovelecspfyet.raJo Di tge npt "W eoaeh wrobeen maeestenwtus si c ddin day Toshirordiedpe hu   paypushecrmemtnwnrosSylviaaal npt He pnunai,yasrifewailubldforaRacstve togsaycsrgysoubl. TsresiWu"cex tretaheda l ba dlnlu?a netf
.l npt "
sth u,"ugonc oty, arshatenhat I so eecrwaneSylviaa Bf.wbjamrHan isis. MarysAn.rg'ver?a nlsvertnnme. Andhd oauh   adr.eleteme.i ."tHe nrtereoc?isgv ecu. iTtvre'iescon.ed ogaboud ?a nd o.a rgysoubldty, ars a,sluctlu.aIt is asyife
nca,nse ele didttebu neher.kAsyifeuh  bak he wandp togbn st erbncmut  gLHan she'iebjamkrcl  skte desoynuh  ielholt tk'oaal npt "And y s,tliak yni ca,nhelprha ?" a gswaH.onocueo.a gswaiBye?hlwubldhernuh  wanerthis,"aRacstve ?ugg   eca "Abofuris a mrkathreranddunly uhr knewe" a gswaCadma,n l oanFrup. "I oaldr.e's u,"ugoOyiirin--"Ga gswaiRxth'nmpregnafu."l npt "Y u'veutal ed ts ha ? GTc wIIdwTrsis saboud ty, arshatp Howploii?ol npt "Twoseonahs,tuh  thubkr.eCldma,ned
'mdnlecsuppos oahweferretrorte oleynioxt"creis. Tsrt thanetogbn privacy.oI oaeh wr--Abofurs wilnkl.ka?isgs"creis,nbf.wd owh 'scprobetomyodaitgder!r
d   l oapeMaybei
d   teoleyni nhat I f aleranddmaybeeI wodr..oa gswaCadma,n etTc rup. "Tha k yni,rthe urpb,"k  owal ed oud nhmrdoom aulut thers wilnsaycmut  ga gswaRacstve Moako  tze?rerbehiton?a  deskwe gswaHa  body fnti nirpc, bud ?a nm al wanercmc mredealid we gswaOfulceotHa E. sd Borniwhnnhaoaaus mfeaze,eateHecate Tog,nouudin E. sd'scMofugustdckkncabonrosGeographic. shawecrk  orefeaze,ef rssaskscabonrosGeographic dur'amrtteirltsip"acrossate,ele di-egohs a  odwoshuse sdeegohs ofst?ae,rend f aJolyeshawecrf rsstn ldsestimemouuAvaloa'realie.tuoil ty, aronly Racstve Moako  tzeknew hvrsIt suseimagcnpeOnly Racstve s wilnknlwittae. Andhttas'naneboeh lgblessi osa  oaecurse.sr ?rGSh  nasdr.esskte deaboud Cadma,napWhastherh'oaaus mtlebu newdoUtraumatic. buteiv wanelo onngot'A maeelHan isav  u,"ugtu haverpllciirou fofssis,ltus. bf.wne h'odr.. No eFof'themeh'oareJoly aus mablketnnpuecuherG ebgve Wohs behitontsmmre have"ead atiaue" uh  ?rpbpk"AbofuuTragknp PsychologicJooevaluav onifilkp"e a gswaCadma,n tsvbg'srlukeet.ruup  teni.totMuek'am.GrnavtM wfue f,Itnwnrostov f rtressnshat,eegohs aulut , h'oaaus mMa,kino'neobWysbasaio athe datgthveg ebgves.a gswaNlwiit wanerin soandecrops. pen tf isstph! a bmJls ofsE. sd andeAvaloa isav s wil .xihvrsidsuby sids.oTsrem wfue f streamrbr u,"ugecu-coldhwat.rointoethmirlhoae,rend nurtut dethmirlfields. Tsrn"it join wttHagMiskaeo ic, toebr'amrltus to thm ernirprvalheywe gswaHasspirahecattplukeet.rudug,nts 'srllendiiinpn owpSttonroly lgbump gSylvia join wtoCmgatgthvepn , ?a ngoltench'irlfllwubldbehiton?a .ater l oanFrTHan aeestgve.el ?rGSh  kissecroimolH,"uly.aBulut tCadma,n s wil asktthvequ   ton, Sylvia urpb,o"She'iesll.k'amaal npt He nocueo.aHasslippecrsis,armLah slu ocm eaistgsa  otovy nal ed ints 'srlh uss togstinrglttebu nenhmrfragro eclidyngeroomre haveInnthm cAnthrfofstHagh uss waneth ecommfuubattebom, wpStttHa bigatrianguaso tubsa  otovsstham-?hlw.r.e npt O"cexupo eastimemheei?,"uaoaehZhaocday  ramssty, artwoswconn thastherloveb,oroeh marsis sunnoimoty, arit waneeasansotlete.roebeefo easie eru mwpld gButeiv h'ocnercm reJoly norked oud lHan isavre haveInnthm uiIt o a  otoiralegohfofstHairutheee-nay g.lattonrhip, hhor  h'oaaus msrgyugea lmeexplora tonneoOyhav sknsuJo p ternialpeMad a d o,yend g osp danci o,c tocercl sll.k'amutheeern.raubetofurs il ne dis. Buteiv bucaon co wrsstatethsienanectpten tk'ou fofsMarysAn.'reattemptetogbn nhat uh  th u,"ugh  so eecrn.rauwtus. end notdfeachany urgemouuocm part.oA  osotherh'oasalheca  htltetogi .e npt Th re werouivtbHoccastonr,yonc oouuChristmaseranddunc oouu?isgfiftistiebirthdai, esrn"hm f slu oiysIt sbeti wtbyoroeh oOy?isgbel vebp Bf.wdiny weroutTlerat'amreaedulu?a 'nmpresu"ce; hhor  nasenw genuine joy inUtoemintimacy.oA  oknlw'amuthad MarysAn.enowilndo  l ba dlny.ed ogtotkl.ka?a nmanch'pty,ghm regaw  txskh is aneapvariecy,HOychildmabuse.sr ?rGTh  threeFof'th mukeptesepaear sbeteboms,ia  odinr  naseaugea lmeebb  tocfnrt?oOyinter   sbetwus mtl m. Hr wowilnvitiecuhe sueboms,i rsstnycsis,ia  odin spo taneicy,HOyit bgnsisledFof'of erd osg tocaccepta cecom rejec ton  wahier inUtoemday nThas'situa tonrh'oasonainuedaf isegohs.sr ?rGWi.ed  'srllestpf urseonahs,tMarysAn.ehaoclost lceointer   sinrlovema yt .e a gswaSylvia ranrsrrufiiierslttebu neCadma,n's h'ir,yend gaz! oataarscam?  payatgthveh'irline,nai aueo,sfaifutebit elenu   paybak he vitiblkpts ha eeytsdthe datgthvefrd oeFof'groyea  oblack.o"
g o wrotliak Idveuercm sus mtlisgscam?aulut poka gswaSh.osanmcoos ounnoiy,gdin slowlyeebbubldhea fofssrreseb   warmingeoiy,gap itedleiir dpbpkIncercmc nay uh  waneaxcomf rt. "
'mdnlecsut ,rthe urpbre have"Rthis'hvre."aSh.obrushecritgsa  otovnrroew k l elohpwarmLai  alo onitgsrufflingeois h'ir.o"
g adr.eiiaginh soynIonercm uawgit aulut tty, aroa gswaiTtvre'ieae  sEdetimemf isercmcsoubl. Tsaayoneris a moonntodfeachZimbabwe aterapnvepeMych'irlhpbsit. Unail r wea lir"l npt  hu uitgeo alu cuddlod coos r.aiOhrsr  ,adin wconn inrmym,amiWysgoif rsstat inc rasi oly hCod-foreheabul oap"Ga gswaiHattonh " a gswa"Njtty, arreJolypeYdtel ckkncou r"l npt Tiny werouquiedotovnrthe d nThn twinrmoonirwerouroeh hCodgsa  otovir,yle didsil"toecattplbetpostspka gswa"Whas'dpbsRacstve havertnnsay?"l npt "She'   l oap"oH. h aceb"aelenu alo onSylvia'iebeckgsa  otovnrclespecrsernuhowilrrufirmly.aH  kissecrit. "
 so eecrts 'sa k yni f ish oTldtdveuaus mwpSttty, arMarysAn..rthe urpbre have hu pooh-poohecroim.a"For"what?oI oaeh wrodonetlny.ed op"l npt "
sknlwittaecyni lsvbgalais thas'nayp Tsaa'neobyuoOyism reasons shate
nlsve ldt.aGa gswaiJ payoneFof'th m,adi u,"waGa gswaiJ payoner"l npt Tiny lay quiedly togstinrgla  olHstenecrts 'su s sluuoOyism Amazon,yend th ecol'amroOyism Joeir.eCloudsgdriftingsub feach skceahv. Lat.r,y lelsA wilIobscu erthv mofu. bf.wno.en owe gswa"Ak dldtetliakd ogaboud thv kits?"l npt H.onocueorsielheabp "A  oaboud aysIt .oAboud soo I sos, esrn"Iesearlecattsietrip.oa gswaiTtv jo n ey tvre?" uh  ?rpb,oknlw'amuthad nasdr.ewhastherTeantge npt "No.GThn soolto.ed o. IsediataarsigauoOygutlubld il?oka gswa"Whas?"l npt H.olaitgeo at oiysIt pk"Njtoask'amgs mpohteequ   tonspkWisoubldthas'tinr  nasesrgyueouwho s wil reJdyldt  mintpal npt "Noedthas'r info eiWu behavio  okSh.obiug?isgch   slH,"uly, nebblinge  t euhakpyteethpka gswa"Wr  ,adiat'neaereliefwaGa gswai
d   bit.al npt "Whas'IoTeanv wanethas'Iotliak b'ekgorcm?mymltus.GErcmcueou
sknlwiisgdead,i rsinr  ouuAvaloa. Ghostsp"l npt "
tedoendr. helprthas'tinydveunercm  o tacdeocus,rtuh  ?rpbge npt "Nercmr Njamf isethiseensegohs. ChristapWhasthtptenebub'ekgttvre?" l npt "
sca,nfeeo thv file t d nWo ectu ?e esoem?" a gswa"ChristapIt'neaus msrelo o. Sut  gGoaahe ?." a gswaCadma,n ?rerup. H. h n ecrk physicJooswitnmfthrerg'verttp compller accessounnois privar sbetebom,  tocurpb,o"Clsgeald paa gswaIv wane?rpbsthrerClsgeald ieh wilnbemalnrteu tu ?e eercmcsoubloataaceot?aesedthas'sernuecur gaewaneabsol
.aCadma,n h'oahwelaitg gTt k dwasenw ehecdso icnuecur gaei.entnorldeisav s fue feo alaEdgarmSians gTt k dwek dobWysmesha icJoobarsishs.sr ?rG"Pleaseyplayub'ekgttv  ba dr wea ecommuniqu  feachE. sdwaGa gswaiLoab'amrd o, Cldma,ne" uh  ?rpbpkl npt Tin nall inpfrolufofssoem dissolveb.e npt Th re waneaxblestpofsmusic, a  otovnra s sluuoOylaitgder.GThn soctsuA MESSAGE FROM EARTH floa e odinr  in neon,ega issereb.e npt A  odinr  folnrteura kaleidoscnprlHOyimagcs:e npt Arteexhbbits in MilwnwISearva tonsub Bvirut.GThn inaitu a tonsoOyism Uni e oNa tonnePr  idium.aImagcssoOysportspkA str'amroOyfaces,cname-droppiam. i grnbgvecspi i.oAyplayu  t eaHLondfuubackg oslupg rgyuchircsav feach skcoller-systemscnlo iuiwe gswaEanmfoOyth s  c wilnbemexpalueosebon a  oinv   tgatndgsa  otovy h'oaaus , olul  nlypeTt yplayu asgdetectiehZfic ton wpSttiissi oscluns gTt  inaitu a tonsme didbe fic ton tooedgivnn thast skcS"creiary-Generalewaneaxde ?ord oerrf rsstn sixtie ' RiccnrtoNixoa. Balhe sinrluna  g avity h'oaaus mema stra oeFnew sport.aErcl thv famiWiarl"eortscerclts folnrteurs mpohxFnew rulks,nnercm descr bebpkTskcs sluubitesdwek dnouivtbHinter   ubldthal thv photo opportunicie r e gswaUlebmJ ely, tinr  nase  paynwiti ortinr re haveIv wanelikerthm Encycoopaedia Br ga,nicJ asgdesiga wtbyosociJooscitluisis. Tsrt twaneemnaio , bf.wnorreJo informa tonwIA  odineemnaio Jo inferu"cexwaneaxcultut osnnfatuously gveitgde owpSttitsIt sstat is'nanebl al toodineeffortsco susspsakably vahv  nd numeous genera tonneoOyonn toegete smch skr re haveSylvia toyebsApSttdineimagcs,ehryubldtu f aloscon.ed ogneweISeoppiam. nd mndiam.forwnro,  tocueoppiam. gain,  tocf al'amrd .ed o. Nosoubloataace.e npt A  odinnra huma,nshape nal ed ttebu nenhmrdanci oslH,"u.sr ?rGWhrerCldma,n h'oahtkon g isbnlu?a nimagc feach skcE. sd mcs-agcawanehsientus.sr ?rGMarysAn.enasenak"d,a?a nheabueug,easyifeuh  werousll.knal i o,csernuwolns , ungainlymltmbsuivtbHpicifuleesrn"no.ecove etobyrsr  -cf.wcootm.ater rrpsotrsrrufaceask  osearecrarotl m,yend th eimp eslyonoHOyn wausll.knal i o wane?eb   etrofgpe"Itty, arI hearosmusic," uh  ?rpbpk"S slus. Streetcs slusp"l npt Cldma,n re'amecsorte nd turned ttp dis.oueug,. Th re waneaxl eloh-girlIquJo gaesosMarysAn.'rev ecu thasthert wognizeo.ater caon  tocurs'ob hhoue UouHOyeamibeo,dstar'amrast skcimagcs.e hu poi eecrn.toodinemitsufofssoem,yennimagc HOyeamiCanadian Rockiuiwe gswa"Idveuaus mtl t ,rtuh  ?rpbpk"Iygrew up"no.enoomfa rfeach skt poka gswaCldma,n  tocSylvia werousiWu"u.e gswa"IdFrTHan tu ?e esoemck"e f'ueoudai," uh  ?rpb,oa  otovnrwailebpkTskk dwasenw commentcfeacheitdOrfofssoem,yend MarysAn.rsucueely skhhototu atWHletend nhat uh  haocerpb,"k  o?eruhancrwentcorcm??erumoxthpka gswa"Oop . I gu  ne
gsa wrodo shat,eca,nI?oka gswa"W  c wilngo dirtuJo," Sylvia urpb scfdlyasr ?rGMarysAn.enocueo.a"
dFrTHan that. I'. lHan isav rcmc mred,rtuh  ?rpbpkA  ouh  curhecaebrast skce UouHOyeamibeo THan a cav,onitnmi ortincimagcseplay'amrinUtoemaim inpfrolufofsh.r.e npt Cldma,n ?rpbrd .ed o,onitnmi orMarysAn..G hu dildr.emnve. gain, dpbdr.espsak, bud ?a neye  nerouothupkA  ouh    paywatahed.e npt A  of aJoly,nSylvia'ieh tocueole.i tuusis,ia  odinyywatahed ateb ,rastsrgyupoi e,nhei rlloasll.k.e a gswaDag,ecaon slowlyeto Craesrd gTt k dwasenw excileonntgs  payanlu?a ndai, oneFof'an elul  nestreamrof'dais. Tsrt tw wilnbema si olu differu"ce. perhaps. Robo  waneancho ecrorcm?thveman.raeospaceport, shadlw'amuitgsa  onanebei osloaueosn owe gswaZ'ekgorcmuawgtHagloab'amgsaldi u,"gtHagkitsufeach skceahv.r een ampmentcn t eactuJolyuinnshargcpiIv wan,gap werouivsrotliagsgdealinge  t ethveman.laluo.xpeoi ton,naijoapt vAntuss.sr ?rGRacstve lppro'amecsoim.a"Z'ek," uh  ?rpb,oiCldma,n mos.paerat?a  unusuJo requ   . Hr wdndp toglsvbgalaAbofu'net woctsp"l npt Zass'sg oslu, salnrtgface g ond  owpSttth u,"uwI"
r herlceorthis?"l npt  hu evaueo.a"He'secunc n ecrkboud thv dpri,iblk inciden .oa gswaiHu'iebjamma yt   tc hriviJo requ   ,nlsveapWhas's itnmi oroim?oka gswa"W lepeTt  ernirprectogynicuissueeoke npt "W ewentcorcm?lceoo sstat aploiintimemngraake npt "Ancrweg o wrotal eaboudgis'mredeancmut  gI,kd o.aka gswaZass wal ed ukathab'ly ove  togaeere.pstump  tocurs, re  ubldois h'ntsuoncois knet. H.odrew  ilargem etob'nta,narfeachoCsIpoc it,ta  onipecrnt"acrossa?isgface   t eaHha  odiast remblkbge npt "Iotliak threrClrlosiisgia yt xthv Minerva'uprto thm Orton today nWr wdndrto cheek?thveman.rsystemspkWhyg o wroldtepfvit tCadma,n alo o,ta  on 'llrhaverlgplace tnntal poka gswaSh.onocueorsa nheab.ele 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  27e 
GEOGRAPHICe 
Pr tgaejoy!
Sweetcjoy bf.wdwo'daisd il, 
Sweetcjoy Io!Jolethve: 
Thdte ohvrsmylk,y
I si o?thvewhiWu 
Sweetcjoy befJolethvepka -WILLIAM BLAKE, Info e Joye a gswaThv Minerva  nerounhei ulyon-prtereoclendiiincraftrbr u,"ugfeachSolosystem. O"cexob hhough slu  ley h'oaeerveu  sdprimarysprtereplants ateb ?thvemin soh'oaproduc do.nbu ndmJ eriJls f rsstn fabrica tonsoOyism solar-colhecd rseJ eriJl kd ono sdBeoluywcootm.aOnouMinerva'diedcinatlerG ebgve WohspeTt  odinrienerouusototogvitiecuhe rhip threrh'oaar u,"uguhe child ebgofsE. sd toethmirlnew norld: hhouGeographicge npt Lat.cinatlermorniam, Cldma,n ?keet.redcina  t eSylviaa "Mic iy'saebrast skch uss w t eMarysAn.,rthe urpbsquiedlya a gswaiHlwiisguh  dl'am?oa gswaCadma,n'sgface  asgdarkpk"Njtosr  a WnrsI thal I .xpecd! wIIt is asyifescon.ed ogwase  payhtkon re didou fofsser.GL ala'sgdeath waneaxn wauf aJo .ed o,oa  otovnr skcbusin sr w t eToshiro--t?as'naneaplahv strat?oOysrgyukino.e
gsa wrosay thas'
g o wroatWHletend it.oI   payregretrit.oRegretrercmcsoubl.aka gswaZass nocueo.a gswaHe helpeocSylvia ou fofstHag?keet.r.e npt Cldma,n wentcto Crrlos.a"Hola."rClrlosi?miWud atehiyalazily,n tretaheda xl eloh,oa  onocueorsielheabp "AggTc  day f ishi i o,ceh?"l npt "A rcmc gTc  oner"l npt TinuMinerva'naneap160-folteloiingveta-w'ameda eo-spaceplaee gItsrdoss waoUtoemartificialIlaan nTrtheasufofssoescnlo y. buteiv c wilnlaluoob any body ofewader.GThn Minerva'nmprtereplants eowilndissociJt elaan wat.rointoehydrogen  tocoxygnn toeuss asefuvepeTogstinr  ley h'oamos.pal ba df urshuse sdeh slu-tripsrto thm Orton craft.e npt Thav c wildr.elahv. Aceoo sstecomi,iaJo equiponnt feachE. sd'naneagiam.fahv. Oeoudaiyanlu?a nMinerva'nowilnfail.GWsrn"steclahv Minerva'failai,yasritmm pa,adin huma,n ace ouuAvaloatw wilnbemgr slueosateb ?thvy,s wil buildyennindustriJoobasedcapablkeoOyia yt xMa,kinoub'ekgto thm stohspeDethut tk'odpriomicie edthas'me didhaan ashuse sdeegohs. Kd ole Uoualoae nasdr.e.nbu n.G pacecraftrrequirpr"esciJoizeocequiponnt.e npt Th y strappecrhhomseld p n.toodineworniseats. Tsrt thaoaaus mfifty,nbf.wd owtt k dwek dobWysn feaeTt  odinriehaoaaus mremnd  :uivtbHcargo space  tocl  neweH,"u.sr ?rGClrlosiwatahed ?isgfsisfc easeyn.toodinepisrd seatpeTt yposi ton wasuivtbHsymbolicuthal reJo:uMinerva'nane ona"sWud byeaxcompller. Andhttas'oUtoemway it is,GClrlosith u,"uwIWousiayatgthve ona"ss,nbf.wweg o wroru msoescnlo yeancmut  gI,wonWHlyifeCldma,n  eels shatenay nProbably nna.GCrdma,n waneapstra oeFoner Hr wdoUbodinr"d,a?a waoUtr sblpc, bud anelo onnsedinreewaneaxdefi iteepurpos ounnois ltus. hunmnd  owpSttaceoo sstecolcrn.ternion a  oforcuwIIt haoasrug,ncnrtOrforcm?thveygohs torf aloaepurpos ounna bmJtenoiy,gdotgidenoiyeapsenseeoOyonaniam. nd p terniale ona"ibudio , bf.whm stb   fnti di i w.sr ?rGOr haoaateb ?thveRobo  inciden .aNlw, tinr  skhhotonw eay toebgnsole.oim.aTt ydeath oOyobyuoOyism child ebgty, arTt k dwasenw woctdf rsstn senseeoOylbae. AndhClrlos, g isbceoo sstecegohs ofsknlw'amuCldma,neds wil wroeay thas'henatWHletTc rdineworkiagsgof ?isgfsisfc'oUmintp a gswa"Clsgeald p Systemscheek.oa gswaCasgeald ienrteu tereprocessesudug,nts gidenClrlosiaosystem-by-systemscheek?ofsbceoo ssteccompobyn.epartneoOyhav Minerva g hu utTppecrn.ehav middlo torfldssiaoschematic. sayubl, "I oaehZiden ifiedelgburn-ttebu nesp trn.ehav re didr wauattitus.pcl paer gI,wowilnsugg   dr paim dur'amrtteenexoaman.tera ceccycoeeoke npt "Isritmsafn f rssodaysoa gswaiYes. Febc tonale eencu of'failure, andddwo'bassuprsystemsp"l npt "All rthis.oPrtereuprsequ "ceaaDe  ubav on, doss wpSttGeographicgol npt "Twoshuse sdea  onenu uiIt os togliftoff,rtClsgeald ierpb cLe dis fldssh xob hhou ona"s bonrop "Gh slu  e  sgs mpohte. Enginh igni tonsub obyuhuse sdea  oskrclcyeuiIt os.akTinyywailebpkTskdpumpirwoinndgsa  otovy fnti nhu uteJdanrowauaoUtoemenginhs ltu.e gswa"Prter-uprs mpohte,rtClsgeald ia,n slceca "Allosystemiegoeoke npt "Taan us'up.oe npt "Thirty-fidenuiIt os togliftoff,rtClsgeald ierpb e npt Th y waileb. gain; hhonotovy fnti nhu   sEdemnaio peTav Minervasslid"acrossatl ewat.rofahv.r a  ofaathreranddsucueelyetovy weroualoftpeTt ynos ouildeocupaateb ?is'naneal ba drcmticJo.eCloudsgar an acrossatl enos ; hhonotovcsky wdoUbabyorlue, graduJolyudarken tkpeTt yrowauskhhototu omi,iaJt.cinsidsuoiy,gsha yt   tocueirri oroim,tgidyngeoiyeapwildyen  joyous senseeoOyfreedachatmatahed beubnc.ed oFesresub hsienorld.tHe nrvecrnt.a gswaHineweH,"u easede ArwoispOrfofssorustnsonainued: di u,"gtHagoxygnn en  hydrogen tankh werouempty,adin  ulyoneplantmreme feo.GWi.e thas'hens wil reJnmfthouplanets. O"cexy h'redub orbiugy h'redhalOeay toebncwst ep a gswaHerglimpieosGeographic twinkh'amraheabp e npt "Doek'am.sequ "ce i itiatndgrtClsgeald ierpb e npt Clrlosiunl ckknc?isgchai  anocupuncitmsixty gvg euiLah slu.GCrdma,n wanere  ubldwpSttoCieeytsdcoos d.nSylvia'ieh tocr   ec scfdlysub hsi. Zass wasmengrossecrn.rauholoodata-maeageonnt modulu displdy,aprobably srgyuinv .toryolHst thas'di i wttnnbkcrct ec f rsstn huse sd.e time e npt Th y di i wtsrgyueouTHan Zack.oTha k Godditedpbdr.ehavertnnbkcClrlosiMartinez! Thav,GClrlosiducidsd, eowilnoaehaaus ma genuine waathp Bf.wsrgyueoudi i wttnnpuecuomutebwlon a cercl parowpStttoday a gswaHe,GClrlos, oljoyebsthoupresu"tmfa rnoommuch.e a gswaGeographic wasen waheuhsitory'silargepaywork ofsma,n(thouZuidsr Zem stb   helbsthout woct)sa  onanesskte dlyea  obymfa rnheilargepaymndablkeobjec . Ti u,"ga morag?keohtonsoOyits formeausizeea  omlsg,liv wanestb   imp eslyvs asehr  a Cadma,n s wil remember"nheiyninonmanch thaoaaus asfly'amruprfeachBu "osiAiresetnnGeographic f rsstn f sEdetime, oneFof'aeshudlohpg osp ofssweld peTt yf sEdein"escvtonsoOya genuine intersteolarl"eacecraftrwaneso differu"v feach skcsimulatoe seslyonsetovy h'oaallosufferud ttebu nre haveIv h'oaaus mtl  culmubav onsoOya   ram,naigro dradvAntussrast skcendsoOya ltustimemofradvAntusss,escon.ed ogsnnbkauciful,esc rtfs w t epossibio gagty, ae haveIv waoUtoombig.GAn oit waoUsl'amrhwetaan ttpmesconplace tnomfa gsa  otaan ernirplyetooploiinto do it--endetovy h'oanorked togbn th t  gIfetovy h'oah'oaregretsoit waoUfa rnoomlJ ertoev ecu thpmebeuth ntimemtovy werouabonrope npt "I waoUtoiakd ogty, artCldma,n ?rpbpk"Whyg pbswr s memoud ?a e?oka gswa"Whas'ak dldtetal i o aboudsoa gswaiY s,kd o nhat I'mdsal i o aboudr Njamwhaten.osay toetl  child ebp Nlec'srlmyahs.kWhygak dw.oreJoly ?a e?oka gswaZass g aGcebruprfeach?isgfigur'am. "Whas'ds yni onan?"l npt "Wsyeirei.wstat aceoo suh werouwilh'amrtc rtsku urnlid s. Ouruhsitorie r NoayoneFof'uiehaoa.nbu nd,amiWysorgfsisfcsounnoolcrusounnE. sdwae npt "I ar u,"ugmynwtus wpSttie,rtZass ?rpbpk"S g pbsJo  Sians anocu memoth ts.oe npt "Thinkasn w nWr weru"'i nhu umarlehv  nd bravepa,a."tn ti u,"gtHas'oUwhaten.otnlo  urseld p.akTinuMinerva'nane?rph'amrttebu neapsea?oOystohs,adin bre didbluerhazeFof'Avaloatbenrt?tl m. "Wr weruadin onhs wilh'amrtc leavh is a   bihintp To graal npt "Spsakaf ise urself," Sylvia urpb. "Terrysbnd 
 so eecrts s memtvre. Weanorked atrit.oWorked hnrop AplotFof'uie pb,"Cldma,n--f rsstat maet.reso dio ldt.ae npt Th y fnti augea lmejoti anethoupacueordoek'am.tubesmengagndgsa  oin lal d.nDoek'am.wpSttGeographic'naneTHan aeesc fofsslowplove,naireunton wpSttaeeoldyen  d waufsisfc. Sh.oh'oasus mtl mrttebu nesommucheranddskhhototu bn nailubldto discove  ifedinlsA wilIdi i tere gain, ercmr Tinuai  aleiir skhhototu sha ges lavorrd o, ast sCsIpoin .aJ paysCsIiiaginav on, no doubu.e gswa"Top floom du gefug" Clrlosi?rpb. "Jewel y depaetonntgsleg ironr,ybeck ironr--al npt Racstve lnddZass wek dou fofstHagMinerva'anddswimmingedug,nth elenus lead'amrhwethouGeographic'oUmainrlock.oA curveordooe seahecabehitontsmm,ia  odinyywerern.rauwomb?oOysteve lnddsskamic.GAnlu?a ndooe oteneb,ia  odinyywerern.r'srlmainrcTrsidor e npt Th  rhip smesWud faifuWysm paypeTwclcyeegohs ofsn waudesola tonrh'odr.esha gec shat,eendetovy h'oanercm quiteegottnn thastsmesW ou fofstHag?hippeTwoshuse sdepeopohclidyngeinrcoos oproxim gagg isbshuse sdeegohs woceodo shat--."tn ifenenuty-fidenpOrwea eofssoem ak dasll.koataanydgivnn time e npt Th y hearosaev ecu feachdl.ker inUtoemrhip, endeCr"syn McAse sws h'ihecattpm.aSh.osanmfolnrteurbeuJulia HTrtha'anddGreg Arruda. Th re wanealeiir s meonetlbonrosbncauseaGeographic'eerveu  sdab orbiuinonmanmi emrhop f rseJn.tera cecofstHagobeerva tonrsJ ellites, endeCrsgeald ia,i tereeJn.tera cec tocr paim robo sgs wil wrobn prepaeec f rsercmcsoubl. Ts k dwasenercm aaproblem f al'amrvolwfu.ehs torkl.kawatahgg isbswOek, endef rseJny?is'naneaxpl mdassigaonntgsae eencu toegeteleay a  omeoi at.cinan wauisola ton. Clrlosihad,i fus wrse,yhtkon adva tagc HOylu?a na"escvs ofsGeographicgaHe h'oahtkon eJny?t wrsosr   utTc ed wpSttfemahegfsisfcsgaHe h'o wroquiteenirpccofstHagnull-g av aonnicie edbf.whm nane?llwubldeug,.e npt Clrsyn swamedug,nth elenus effortl  nlypeAldi u,"g?a nbuls wasmsrug'amrivtbHa  omvtbHponWHlous,tuh  mnd  owpSttan unca,ny eraceass k dwsrt tha nweH,"u waoUtoa eofssoi  Teeug,.e npt "GTc rdu ?e eyni,rtuh  g eutecattpm.a"Iv waoUobWys  paygutlubldloaely uprtvre. Lots ofst?ae,rend oldycubesmdu ?ortrttebu nedbf.wty, arsr  ."kA strandsoOyha nwdssh -ou fbrug,ncnirlflla e oleay,cslecarairfeach?hreranddsl  chuckWud anddswepteierbackyn.tooplace.aiHlwiaruadin child eb?" uh  lsk"d.e npt "Fine," Clrlosi?rpb. "Bf.wdiny ove wat.roldt  plantspoka gswaSh.opaet.croimoob hhou hin,  tockissecroimolH,"uly.a"Tha k yni,rtuh  ?rpbpk"Now--yni no ectsmecompller ebom? Ak dldtesl'amrhweno ecprivacy?oa gswaCadma,n shsvbgsielheabp "No.GGe sinrob hhis,GClrsynpeYdtewerouas'mredeinvolvebsinrAbofu'netaisi osasdabyoner"ka gswa"Mut tttanuivsrg" uh  ?rpbpkTsk.tuh  coos d ?a neye ,  tocblusheda xl eloh.e a gswa"ThiienaneAbofu'necreche,"aRacstve ?rpbpk"We,san h ace eug,eanc.ed o,cforwnrosorgbackwnrop ead atiaue gidenuneChildeoAbofuuOner"l npt Tinuholostagc regaw  txplayuorte 'eericssoOyimagcs.eErcmcnimagc HOyyninonAbofugrfeachinfo cy j wnrop TinyywererdirtuJoly lgt?ae-lapsu displdy,acarrnyngeoiyrttebu nehwetoddlorhsv .e npt Cldma,n watahed absu"tly.a"WhoiaruasCsIparAfussoka gswaRacstve l oanFruncomf rtablkp "Ascy s,kd o,gdin skermganddegg ?rmpohh werou!hwhtnuroeh feach skcmemberneoOyhav cnlo y. endetovmfeaze,e ona"ibudio neoOyhaos owho dildr.emaan ttpltsip"f rsonetreason  isbnlu?a . Ts k daruarepresu"tatiehZ?rmpohh feachaolethvobasic'geneebeeg ospsoandecultut neoOyhav norld, bud a   flawl  npiW  s wilnbempickyr TinuidhaawaoUtoa esrgyuchild ebgs wilnbemrrpsotrbeuth ncnlo yeaneaxsoolt, wpStorte nyr"escifbeeparAfuJooaet'ehonntspiIv wanyobyuoOyism ismut ticJoobaseneoOyhav cnlo y. en .xperionnt n.rshiftingshav primarysboal'amrimp"ra tveneoOyaychildmfeacha p'ir,yo tuuaecunc pteoe system. Ascy s,kd o,gdin .xperionnt wdoUbegunsub  wanes fafter"nheiG ebgve Wohs,ta  onaoUtermubavec f uisegohsilat.r.oa gswaCa"syn McAse sws ?miWud anocurpb,o"Wr weruama yt  .nbu ndbabies.oe npt "Ydtealeiir habueuubus,rtZass ?rpbpkCa"syn nocueo.a"Maybeiweieh wilnoaehalHstenecr"kIc oouu?e  mint. hundpbdr.ehavertnnsay nNvbody w wilnoaehalHstenecrtnnCa"syn;rwoich waneaxbiugocu, bncauseaCa"syn h'oaaus mobyuoOyism genuine ?e oenus oOyism G ebgve WohspeNo ueous wilnquiteeremember"whonotovy h'oastTppecrlHstenublounno.r.e npt Racstve ?rpb,aiTtv projec onaoUtermubavec f rylu?a nreasonsp"l npt Cldma,n naneTook'amroudgi tuublackl"eace. ClrlosiuawgobWyssCsIback.oH  lsk"d,aiProblems?"l npt "Stuf sstat caon ttebu nefeachE. sd,dmaybeealegohfafter"we r JtpgTs k dweruafile touuism BodlohpBabyoresuarchpkW edpbdr.egetelnc.ed oFesresf isegohs. Geographic'oUlahv r weivebrsigaalewaneaxle di-spi i communiqu  tnn egohs after"we r JtpgGarblkbgiIv tsvbgquiteeaewhiWu tc rebgnshyucteie,"aRacstve ?rpbpk"Ts k dwaseresuarchsstat impliec shatyhav crecheuchild ebgh'oaagivtbHdiOOiculdetimesboal'amp Tinyyh'oaalloaus madopeecrn.foplovd o,csupportiehZhoaes--wh k dparAfusnh'oanaileb.egohs f ischild eb, bud duo torfcmtio gagproblemh werouforcucrtnnutio zemartificialIwombspl npt "Sure, problemh,"CldpgTs k 'redaleiir problemhwISeauisiicJoly significant?eMaybepg rgyukinouoOyacademic domubancu gaon waoUsl'amro peTaose,san getenapaypeIotliak srgyuoOytHairutheorie cslecsu"tmanocurgyugo.eburiedpeNumbern,gdoopl npt "Oeoutheorlsh'oahwedoe  t ethveebgocriaJo flux inUtoemllerus. Tsr numbnrienecslecsugg   dshatyhav actuJoeebb  tocfnrt?oOybiochemicJooproducts anethoumot?a  is awaangsasll.kgsafrrpb,shusgry,adirpc, sexuJoly sebmulatndgswhatercm ty, ariieae ormi fus mmunica tonsbetwus mmot?a  andechpld gIt'neanot?a  nutsisf.wty, aren .mnaio Jo nutsisf., ifeyni ni  ,aasIiiporto ecdoUblTc  orgoxygnneoke npt "I th u,"ugstat aceoo sthwhto.ed osgh'oaaus mdupeicate?." a gswaRacstve ?hrugg d. "It'nestb   aeesramf im.GWsrn"ldtetry toebrnave axcomplleroprogramrtnnsbmulatnethoumcs-agcsediataarmot?a  ssfcsounnoeischild,cy s,havertnnremember"nhatritriieae i ibackylTcp betwus mtl mmot?a  andetl mfetus. Ts usa  s oOyfetushh werouseudieb,ia  odin eiir shatyhavirmmot?a seresponWHdrhwethom werout wocteb,ia  oairefenumea eofsercmcsoublot?as'nanel wane onanesrnavec f ryusern.r'srlcreches.aka gswaiSo?"l npt "So?oA craesriieaehnrsI desiga wtbyos mmirt epgTs k diieaedifferu"ce betwus mtl mclumsy ehega cecofstHaghuma,nbody a  odin sophisiicJtndgsn.telhecduale e ecusamos.pbyeaxcommirt eeofsexpertsiducid'am.woich ebgocriaologicJooexperiu"cesdaruagTc  forgbabypeTt y,tsis sunnh slu oud thv experiu"cepeTtisuivoddswinogwaseiaJppropriJtnedthas'orgasmic responseepaet.r  waneaxbiochemicJoo ormi fushildmabuse,aarmot?a  experiu"ci osa oerrisgdamagiam.oeischild. Tsr lsbeeJls swungshav profile oae nay,adin bgnserva tveneanot?a p Tooomanyxmutphemns gToommuchmadru"aline. Chiolethwhtokiddicssou r"ka gswa"Ouch.oa gswaiHinosthis.oBf.wdinoprogramrmay taehaaus mtoomblalup Dpbdr.eplace .nbu ndof'an imp apt ob hhou hild eb, leavubldthom k l elohptoomvulnerablkpts havirmenvirononnt.oka gswa"Whas'htptenebuoncE. sd?"l npt "Njtomuch.kA stauisiicJoly significant inc rasern.r.mnaio Jo problemh amoiintaose,shild ebp Assli,"ugeal'ca tonsoOyenninc rasern.rsociopaahy.oBf.wremember"scon.ed o--eJnmfanddevcmc j eFof'taose,shild ebgwaseia k lndiam.hoae,rueouwheruadin parAfusnh'oanaileb.f isegohsounnoaverlgchild. Tsrlsh'oafa rivtbHlsve a  oatternion ttanuaveragcpiIt is inter   ubldto nnaeUwhatei?,"uaoaehZhaptenebuifesuchmchild ebgh'oaaus mplacecrn.tooaveragc.hoae'situa tons.aka gswaCadma,n etoceodpbdr.eturn. "Whas'aboudg wrs?oka gswa"Ts k dwasenosoubloaboud nhat feachE. sd--we th u,"ugstat gidyngethom lsve w wilns wfu.racrGany p ternialeproblemhwoka gswaTsr imagc HOyAbofurs nainuedatooagcpiFeach imemtontimemtovoprogramrw wilnlocklon aeparticulwauskqu "ceaaAbofursltmbubloa m wfue fpiYninonAbofurkiek'am.arsocca nbace.nAbofurvitie'am.Edgarmin h ac tonwIAbofurdebat'amwIAbofurdefeat'amrEdgarmin debateaaAbofurteanmi orarclesseia wvodcraftrtuuaeg osp ofsBiters.oAbofurhi i o,cmndiam.quickly pahv  ebjamye sinjut deEdgarmSians gTt yywerersurr slueosbyeaxunircmuc HOyAbofurTragkns.e npt Racstve ?rpb,aiItanorked--in generae.nQuiteesr   i msrgyucasen.oka gswa"Fo  insta ce?"l npt Zass leaneb.f iwnrop "Child eb feachgeneebeeg ospsoIt oi toneb.f isg osp taisi os fushild ebp L elohpChakagrfeachNew Guinea, g isinsta ce. ToshirorTanaka.oBf.w
sknlwiRacstve wTrsis saboud Abofugra  oT isseCeencu,ia  oaifew oth ts.oe npt "Ercmcueoun.r'srlcnlo yeparticipaeecrn.rtsr nureericssb'ekgttvn,"aRacstve ?rpbpe npt "I remember,ai Sylvia urpb. "T?as'naneaoreJoUlabo  ofnlsvea"l npt "Wseb hhou hild eb wek doilrr,y lelsAerersharotrbeuth ncnlo yeanesr  a Ob hhebu nenhmirutus s.eErcmcnobyuoOyismmgh'oaagdaze,eparAfus,devcmc cnlo istgh'oaagdaze,eshild ebp ThiienaneobyuoOyism reasons shatedin sexuJoyfreedachn.r'srlcnlo yenane?orfluidwoka gswa"Wr  ,rtCldma,n ?rpb,aiw edpbdr.ehaan any diseasen.oka gswa"True,"aRacstve ?rpbpk"Bf.wdinoot?a  idhaawaoUtoa eaceopregnafcihh weroudesirablkp If aeparticulwaumot?a  orgfat?a  dpbdr.ewdndrto h'verttp childma dshatyh?ae,rtl mfetus s wilnbemremnd    tocfeaze,,i rscarsis sunnterm n.rauhostgllerus,  isbnmartificialIwomb gTt yys wilnbemthawecrwhonotovumot?a  orgfat?a  wasereJdanf rsstn responsibio ga,g isbdopeecrbyeaxparticulwausk eofspartnerr--al npt "Or  ley s wilnbemadopeecrn.ts hav generaelcnlo ypkW etsis suhat fa rivtbHoftnn thany lelsAererbdopeecrbye"escifbeeparAfus,rturpbsClrsynpe"Ig pbswhat I s wilsunnty, aroaSh.otratWud off ga gswaRacstve uitgeo,ia  oremnd   ?a  glesse , rubbubldherutumpohh hnrop "YdteasanFrgyuy   erday toelsvbgn.ts AbofueoI oaeh gI,wisseI'. donetitmsooner, bnfvtbHRxthcslecsoeinvolveb gI,f slu srgyu.ed osgwoich disturbeieaaka gswaCadma,n lsk"d,aiWhatukinouoOy.ed os?"l npt Onotovuholostagc Abofurhaoasrug,noilrr.oAbofura  odirtuJoly ercmc noma,nof ?isggenera ton, astonettimemoisbnlu?a . Abofuro.r'srlmainl togsoneFof'aetrTcp of'G ebgve Ss wtnel crbyeClrlotta Nolaura  oCadma,n Weylalup a gswaiHhZhasmsrea fleaderrhip p ternialedbf.wty, aroka gswa"Budsoa gswaRacstve ?rpb,aiI ssteccombubav onsoOyectogynicuomi,iara  olaekgofs"escifbeeboal'amra  oimp aptubldhirGanyobyuhnrtOpa,ais'naneAbofuuTragknp Iotliak threrhhZhasmbonWHdrno.enor'srlmemberneoOyhav cnlo y. bf.wdoethm dreamrof'cnlo iza tonsutsIt .al npt "Whas'oUwrfugowpSttthre?i Sylvia lsk"d.e npt Abofu'neimagc,ilarger thanyltus. searecreug,ea.wdinm,aimmense,aeerious,tn.ternpe npt "I  o wroonan threrhhZhasmennidealisiicodiet?oOysoav'thisgcnlo yeeh wilnbe. I  o wroonan threrhhZhasmthm kinouoOygino-ho s nqu r-thm-unircmuc attitus.pt?as'nesh'oahwehavertnngeteo tuuGeographic'n.r'srlf sEdeplace.aIoTean l eeraely thas'dreamrutsIt ,ethm dreamrof'spread'amracrossatl emainl togstl eplanet. Tsr ernirprTau Ceeb systemsutsIt .aOfuMa,kinouia yt xthv stohsia  orema yt xthvmrtnnAbofu'newissns gTtas'dreamrusa?isgmot?a  andefat?a grssiereason forgbeibl. Tsaaydreamrnanesoav'thisgwaneallsaboud, remember?" l npt "
sty, arrememberartCldma,n waoUto u,"ufulpk"Bf.whisgdebatessty, arscon.?aesy lelsskhheal ba dbgnserva tve. Baekgto bavut ? L ve-wpSt-thm-planets?ortrofs"eseches.aka gswaiWr  ,a
g o wrotliak he wdndp togstrip-min stl eplanet. He wdndp togpeopohctl eplanet. Ourutechnologyeiieadva c do.nbu ndtoeliehZi,ncnrmo yenpSttAvaloa--t? k diienoIdi i togproduc uivtbHchild eb thanyAvaloatca,nhalul p"l npt "Alu siIt o?"l npt "
stliak threrAbofuuTragknastTppecr?hlwubldusa?isgtru  face  ploiintimemngraaa gswaTsr imagc HOyAbofurav'tweld  lppearpc, dupeicate?sutsIt  alo onthe wdlls.e npt Racsve l oanFrfeachonetimagc tuuanot?a  andeuitgeo.k"Abofuubelievcsediatathe omi,iaJo cnlo istsnoaverlb'ntoned ttp dream.aButrayed it.oI tliak he is interaJolyerat?a  thanyexteraJolyemnaival d.nIotliak threrhhZi?,"uaoaehZl elohptru   o tacdowpSttanyoner 
stliak threrAbofu's senseeoOylsve haoUobWyshwedoe  t egoae acc mpoissonnt.oa gswaCarsyn smiWud,yarfldssioOysoav'uh  m paysaehaaus mTHan a huse sdeegohs ngot'"Ofus wrse thrergocssbeyolu srciobiologyp"l npt "Axl eloh. Bf.wbjbyuoOyisa.emaanseoiyrda oerous,rtRacsve ?rpbpk"O ndoerei.? A  omyodaitgder is in lsve wpSttoCm,ia  opregnafurbyeoCm,ia  oscon.?aesy
gsa wroremember"I'mdaxpsychiatristaoa gswaCarsyn pud ?a ,armLah slu Racsve gTt yyetTc rdogstinr a  ol oanFratathe Abofurimagcs.a gswaCadma,n ehsvbgsielheabp "Whas'dpsturbseme.ioUtoemennirprdpri,iblk inciden .aHe h'oauspiFeach srlf sEdemomea ets 'srllest nWr weruusk eupnbkaucifully.oBf.wdink dwasescon.ed ogsnnty, arscgllderlc cnld-blTc s saboud i.wstat ty, aroka gswa"T?as'nhas?"l npt "T?as'i.emaanseon wonWHlywho AbofuuTragknareJoly is.kWho'net Joly lliehZbehiton?Cieeyts.aka gswaiYdte u,"ugso kd owifGanyobyudoerr"ka gswa"M ? Whysoa gswaiBncauseaheaprobably bonWHdrivtbHtodldtetlaura yobyuesre gIt'neco wrshyu.ed kneoOyydteash?isgfat?a wae npt "I--"GCldma,n hesital d.n"I waoUsl'amrhwesay I oaldr.ekd onostat. bf.wIcsuppos  I dpbpkHe wanealeiir f al'amrreasons so greplacer w t eus,ta  ois'nandr.e  payh?as'J paiara  oJeslyca werou?isgfsisfcs.oBf.w
s o wrokd oywho's'n.r'srre, Racstvewae npt "I'veutoldyyni oosufofssoav'th k diieso kd or"ka gswa"No,rtCldma,n ?rpb.a"Whoiwerou?isgparAfussoka gswaRacstve l oanFruncomf rtablkp "All rthis.oIt'nenjtoaswifGis'naneactuJolyuuecur gaeseahecpiIv wanyivtbHa generaelcnlo ialIag euonnt. I gu  ne
g  pay eelruncomf rtablkp Iv wanyatWHlomyo onocc s--t?as'nanesoynyni s wil wroaccessoit.okter clearpcdheruthroatpeiTtv fat?a  wasefeachE. sdw A Swedissemat?amaticia,nof Ruslyanyext ac toncnamed Koakovp"l npt Cldma,n skhhototu g.lax,GClrlosinoebeede AswifGhe h'oa.xpecd! --endefearpc--enlu?a nrev.lattonsaldogstinr. "Alu 'srlmot?a soa gswaRacstve l oanFrataSylviaa Sylvia cnloreb,ia  odin psychologist nocueo.a gswa"T?as'nerthis,"auh  ?rpbpk"AbofuuTragknaiseynioxtknp Is'naneynioxegl.aka gswa"J paia'ieh lf-brot?a ,rtCldma,n ?rpbsquiedlyaa gswaiYns gI sster thaoaaus  any da oerrHOyAbofurg.lattamrhwejbyuoOy?isgsislern,gI,wowilnsaehaurpb scgysoubl. Irkl.kat ackgofs"uchsstd osgty, arbuteiv nercm  aon up. Jeslyca indr. hCsIbiologicJoosisler anyxmuteetlaurJ paiaris.oe npt Sylvia wanercmc quied, etoce,u?e  mint off i msrgyuunreJnmablkpplace.aiAbofura  oJ paia.oka gswa"Whas'doe yudord o?"aRacstve lsk"d.e npt "
stliak necslenor'srlmainl to. Onotovunexoadpri,iblkpoka gswaSylvia curhecao tuu?e  sids, stb   flla 'amra  incheoe so off tovuch'ir.o"
gnercm helbsoCm,"auh  ?rpbsquiedlya "
gnercm toldyoiyrtta.whm nanemin edthas'I,wowilnwatahgoiyeanoasaroufor oim.aTta.whm nane'srlmostnbkaucifulsstd o'n.r'srlnorld.tTsrlmostnprecious childmn.r.xHstenc p"l npt "Probably nnejbyu pb,"aRacstve ?rpbpk"We,eh wilnoaehadonetthas. Abofugra  othirty oth ts.aBulo oubldto nnejbyubuteeaedulu?a peNo wonWHlytt yyetarlecattmiruculd. Tsrlsh'oatotbenr ogsnmewst epoka gswa"Whoaiselidyngeinrster ?rtCldma,n lsk"d.e npt "
stliak t?as'nesdi i togf alooud," Clrlosi?rpb. "
stliak t?as'nesdi i togf alooudsn w "ele 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  28e 
TITHEe 
An hones fGoddine'srlnoblepaywork ofsma,.e -ROBERT GREEN INGERSOLL,fGodn,gPsramIe a gswa"Hrgyu.omutebw," J paiar?rpb. Abofurnocueo,ia  oacceptnFraucuprof'cnf eerfeach?im.tTsrlvalheydwaseswolns  wpSttiist,ta  ois'"sWud acrossatl heal ba dsll.k'lya a gswaJ paiarh'oahtkon toemewahe-morniamrshift.e npt Abofu sippecratathe cnf eepk"We'ruagTyt xthebu nenhmrmainrvalheywnWr oaverlgcouplkeoOy e ecusa'srre, y s,kd opoka gswaJ paiarnocueo.a"Her tbveg ebgves. Tsrl'rhptoomfa rfeach sklmainrcampshwedoeusdabymsrea fcnrmpoka gswa"Bf.wdinosrrd woceos memcoos o.nbu nd, rssr sblpeoke npt "I say we taan ttplnr ogeay ah slu." J paiar?cratahed n.r'srld paywpSttoCietoe. T euigrsslss,naestream.aiI swe taan ttplsoxth.r  rolle,swe canuavoi odin problem.aka gswaiWredo,ro.r'srllu?a nh togshavertnnforostov stream.aNoy e ecuoaboud nhatp"l npt G ebgveh weroudeat?'n.r'srlnader.GThn umarlehv soublotwedoe aieso koceoercmcsoublog ebgve-sizeocbnfvtbHtoemevAntuJo gae."tn ah se.sr ?rG"So,rturpbsAbofueo"Whas'ds yni tliak?oka gswa"Tsiseplanete aieher tbvfvtbHwe caae,rend is'nilloaueher tafter"we'ruagTne. I  o wrotliak neccanukoceoercmcsoubloweg o wroTHanpgTs k dhaieso bemanlu?a nnay,aend Iewdndrto f aloi .oa gswaiIIag eu."kAbofu marked ayposi ton upstreamrfeach sklforoiamrspna.G"Whas'say we seeo thv wat.ro  t eaHfreshlyuulaitgderecr?u.eh? DrawgtHagg ebgves up. Weanodr.egetetl hefeachfuru?a neug,--t?as'neanot?a  g ebgve'oUterr gory. endetovk diieplclcyeoOyfsv . G ebgveh  o wrof?,"uaunl  netsrlsh'vertnnty, are"esciJolyetovlmainl topvariecies.aka gswaiWhas'ds yni onan?"l npt Abofu waoUto u,"ufulpk"Weunercm t Joly seudieb grnbgvecifu.racrionr,ygrnbgvecbehavio ,sbeyolu basic'hu"tmanocaet'ekepaet.r s.oBf.wdoendr. itmseeyrtta.wth s  g ebgves canuactuJolyutliak? Pl t? Obeerv ? Tsrl'rhpn.telhigea --muchmmuteetlaurtovlF sEdetolcrus gTt yywererovk dnr ogbvfvtbHwe werer 
stliak threrjbyu ay we may bemablkpts s mmunica ee  t ethvmoty, a"oH. stTppec,ra  olautgeo.k"J paydreami o,cI gu  n. Les'negeteo e  t ethvedai, hud?"l npt W?as'naneiaywpSttAbofura  og ebgves? Is'g'verJ paiargoos obumpi. Abofu waoUuh a neeat?'n.r'srlg ebgve-shoo 'amrgaonn,gap if tovucarlofu g ebgves uawgAbofura  o  pay eceoov.r.e l npt Old'G ebgve sllpt.e npt Th nprey thas'lived n.r'srllaan wowilnfi i tereateb ?thveendsoOystd os. Sh.oh'oanavenesr   din previous day,aend n.r'srsettimeseoOylsamrsll.ksia  oquiedodais,naesi olu majorgfi i'amrc wilnlastdherutunrto f fseensdaisdbvfvtbHhusga  g eweatendurablkpa gswaSsrllccastonJolyerousotofeachd ram,ndpsturbetrbeuth ndaitgders ofsGc  fly'amrov.rheabp Ttmiruhum nane'srls sluuoOyism Deat?'Wino.e
t feitgden i teredug,nts terecore, mos.p?a nhunkeredug,nn.toodinewatnr a  owatah,   paywatah.a gswaCha geswaseia dine'ir.oTh nlH,"u waoUh llucubavory;oercmcsoublofnti evanescsf., trans gory. tissue-soub g hu uniffeo thv ts usa   scsf.seoOylesseryltuso orms prepaeyt xthvmseld p f rsstn endsoOyercmcsoubl.  rgyuregaw a mosn sr oOybri i'am;msrgyuavoi etrbri i'am ernirply;esrgyucha gec cnloreoe shape,g ismigrJtndgsormenderecrarsll.kofeachwoich e"tn aygrnbgvecc wilnnjtorousoxthvm.a gswaYni s wil wrotliakeds wil wroplan f rsstn endsoOyercmcsoubl. Bud, debwsily,nOld'G ebgve nane'rnyngety, arshonotovcsmesW ofUblTc  snappecr?a nfully awaan.e npt Thre.ptimesewpStia dinepahv skrcraeldais,nsh.oh'oafolnrteur"uchsa scsf..aEanmftimemsh.'d,f slu axde ?opuzzWu beestpflla 'am, i mseb   wader.GAfter"sh.oh'oaalnrteuridrto ripen g isbu ay  rsswo,ais'ta  ec   pay ine. Lestph?ae,rwsk.tuh  returned ts terefavoriteere  ubldspna,nsh.onoebeed thas'largemnumbnrieofGanimJls h'oapass d ?a nnay:omanyxpuzzWu beests,naefet?oOythv two-legg desrictspe npt Th nsrictspflewgtHebu nenhmraim inphummingeflyehs,adin daitgders ofsGc  gTt yywal ed; olytt yyraw al ba dasefaa daseaosisler fu spi i, rioiamrstra oeFshr  sediatasmesWud oOytar a  olH,"un tkpeTt yccombubed tsoomanyxdifferu"v smesWseia ofeaeTt y dpbdr.eea.wth im ug,nynino g hu knewgtHCsIbncauseash.oh'oas memcoos o.nbu ndtoethmirlnesdp togwatahgthvm.a gswaSh.oh'oat   ec thmirldefensns gTt yyknewgwheruasheswasebvfvtbHuh  cowilnsmr   dinm gI suh  camemcoos o.nbu ndtoemaan oud dpstincrGa"escvs ofsthmirlbehavio ,stt yybncagyualarmebpkTwecu thpycsu"tmfly'amrstd osgin pursuis.oBf.wwsk.tuh  retrnavec,stt yydpbrd .oattempdrto engagn.a gswaSh.of slu  leim roleseoOycomba.wno.eernirplyndissimila rno ?a nug,. Th y s wilnmnve.fahv. Tt yywererowfu.rs gTt yyhonroec thmirlynino a gswaC wilsut yybneaokinouoOyg ebgve?gTs k dwererbuilda  g ebgves,ia  odin srea f lalhatmndiam.g ebgves oOythv nTrth,ia  odin sd oyg ebgves uh.'d,h'oatotf?,"uatwecu iuu?e  ltus. a  odin kinouihas'laid ?a nswimmers n.raustra oer'nmprnouty, ae haveIuu?e  yoxth,nOld'G ebgve h'oananWHleoafa rdur'amrtteerainaeseasonspkWanWHll payandecuriosi lsAerers mehowpliaked ts din dayswwsk.t?a nhe ?oh'oanewaheuburst.GWsrn"stecpainrfaueosit r JtZbehitonalnew cla iaypeSh.oregaw  tx?e eeiir shatyhavlnorldtf?drtogstinr. Sh.odev.lopecraHhusga  oOya  ifferu"v kitogstlatypusWud herutownroshavlblurryse Uos oOythv paet.r  t?as'nanehavlnorld.a gswaSh.of lnrteu thrlnader.l npt W?k.tuh  f slu watnr alreJdanutTc ed wpSttjbyuoOy?a nug, kitogsuh  f shis.oBf.wif tovuta  e'n.r'srlnader wanealik.tty, arTwosdissimila rg ebgves cowilnsharuadin saon wader.GThny snarWud anocunappecrateeaedulu?a . bf.wmaeagedrs mehowptorkl.katovuterr blkpspi i atWHlo ona"s. Th y s wilneolerJtneeaedulu?a 'supresu"cu,iif eaeduknewgtHateso be,iar aieso ebgpe npt Th nsrictsasn w nWrru thpycs memnewgkinouoOyg ebgve?e npt Th nsmesW ofUblTc  feachupstreamrwaoUutrofg; bf.wOld'G ebgve mnd   dug,streamrbyeaxl eloh,oarairfeachhavlblsv . ter cla e oherself wpSttiuc,ra  oburr teu dl.k. ter extenueorsa nsd rkve so brea hepkA  ouh  naileb, a  owatahed.e l npt Chaka ar u,"ugSkeet.r II nrt?ia orcm tteerircm ttirty clickslsoxth ofUSha gri-La. Th re waneaygrnbgvecu?a e, bf.wnorpoin ?ia kilh'amris.oAnuempty ecologicJoonichn wowilnmoraly attracrGalyninoa . fahv.r mgnshnr. So ?a he ssll.k'am.g ebgves lik,ia  oscmfa rnheiarra oemea ehaoaaus  a gTc  onere npt Thre.ptimesebvfvtb,stt yyhaoalure odin srebgvecupstreamrw t eaHulaitgderecrcarcass gTt yyha owatahed via caonra. Th  f sEdetimeash.oh'oadragge odin mea fb'ekgto ?e  l'ir.oUnsauisfacd ry. So tt y'duch'ine odin mea fts din g oslupgTin srebgvech'oahwedevnioxitcu?a e, a  ouh   pb,"after"exami 'amrtteearua.e npt Ano thv tsiroshimemtovy h'oahtkon toeirosrrd acrossaiar?rfety,nbncauseadin srebgvecwasebusy eat'amwITt yyha , n.raumaet.reofespsak'am, t t ed ts din srebgvecgob. Abofurh'oainsi  ec knait,ta  oChaka THancrnt"anesr  ae npt TodayoChaka sweptetteerircm wpSttoCieglesse , a  ouawenosoubl.a gswa"T?isiisgSkeet.r TwownWr oavernw co tacdoa eacer"ka gswa"None?"l npt "Njtoublog ebgve-sizeocisgmovi o. Nonhe tcs srcuwIIg o wroTHanoit.okl npt "Ano thv rircm sierun 'amrwpSttblsv , indr. it?oka gswa"Ts  ox wanealive wovnrweuch'ine oitrn.ehav rev.r.nWr numbndait,tslbeed it,ta  ohe siidbli i togeeat?. I'mdselh'amryni, itmsh wilnoaehadonetthmejob.aka gswaiWaitcuensmenutes,"kAbofu erpb e npt Chaka woveWud a oslupgTiisgwanea gTc  ltus. Th re wanebkaucy,aend elul  nediscove yra  og owt?. Buteiv requirpd vigila ce. His ltusoh'oaaleiir requirpd vigila ce. Sincu thp f sEdetimeatta.whm haoaaus memawaruaoOythv differu"ce betwus mhimsIt  ano thv ot?a   hild eb, hm haoaauen vigila t.e npt Sincu thp f sEdetimeatta.whm haoa orme odin unton wpSttAbofura  oT isseano thv ot?a s, hm haoaauen vigila t. Th npricu of'freedachns et.raJo vigila ce. Whoaurpbstta.? His fat?a ?e npt HeypusWud hioUmintub'ekgto thm ta bgalah to e npt Chaka haoaaus  adopeec,yonntorotrbeuBig Chaka.uBig Chaka wasefeachAonricJp L elohpChaka's seedoh'oas memfeachNew GuineawISeoce,uth re waneayco nscvton,ta  ois'nandr.ethv odd AfricJncname.oChaka smiWud to thiak of it,ta  oh oanFrforwnrosto thm vitiecfeach sklmainl togsf rsstn slopiamrshadlwaoOythv big dpri,iblk. a  odin cargo a  opeopohcuh  n wilnbrubl.a gswaHeuchec ed aceoo shioUmeu.rs g"Clsgeald ?oka gswa"Nega tve,pChakag"auh  ?rpbpa gswaDam,. Th re wane  paynosoublowarmganddwilh'amrtc mnve.dug,nth rer A fleast--nosoublotta.ws wilnbemlure obyorlsv . Hm haoalo onth u,"ugstat g ebgves weruamorhpn.telhigea  tlaura yobyug'verttpmlcrediamf i.a gswa"All rthis,rthe urpbsf aJoly g"Les'nedump spi i.aka gswaObyuoOyism ot?a  skeet.rs debppecr?pi i pesWutp n.toodinewader.GThny dissolvebsal ba dinsta dlya Tinewader seet ed wpSttscsf..a gswa"Les'nesee," Chaka srpbpa a gswaOld'G ebgve nanen.rago ypkTinesmesWseofUblTc  a  oupi i wek dove whelmubg.aSh.osa eecrts mee.wth s  stra oeFsrnavut neon toeiroug,ng oslu,gdoel wanpe npt Th re wanesommuch t?as'nanenewgkboud thvm.a gswaBf.wsheds wil wrodo shat. Hmrxsoolt self wa eecrts aet'ek gI suh  camemn wautinm,auh  n wilnt wautinmrts pieces,  istt yyw wilnkb   her. Sh.ow wilnl wanenosoubl. Aceouh  cowilndoe aief?,"ua gainstdheruug,ndl.kea dinstincrs,  eelrstn spi i boilinge  t iuu?e ,ta  ohieeburiedrn.ehav iucia  odin silt a  owant.a gswaAno dream.a gswaSh.orememberebsaetimeawsk.tuh  h'oano dreams.a gswaSh.orememberebsshonotovcnorldthaoaaus memso stra oe.GWsrn"steccnlors a  ouhapes a  oumesWsebncagyupaet.r s.oAgo y camem  t ethvecha ge. Sh.oh'oasufferud g isbufullccycoeeofeseasons. endetovk dweruadimesewsk.tuh  wanesomsickyandecrazeouihas'uh  compohtelanf rgjamwhatei ehaoaercm aus mto  eelrsr   a  owoolt. Ano thv.tty, arano thv.t?a nhe ?ofnti he vy. Swolns . Onotovufa rsidsuoOyago y camemaurawarun sr,nalnewn srpe npt Thas'nanesok.tuh  regaw  txremember"nhi os. To thiak of tovuimagcsotta.wsamemaaynthis, a  owonWHlywhrru thpycstTppecra  odin norldtoOyfsv ra  ofear regawpe npt Thas'nanesok.tuh  f slu sh  cowilntr   din spi i  tx?tTp,gdoego anay nWok.tuh  regaw  txmahv.r din hicuee esse cecofsherself. Thas'naneth  regin 'amroOyercmcsoubl.a gswaSh.oknewgtHatescon.ed ogh ?oh'ptenebpkA  ouh  knewgtHatesh.osa eecrts pass tHCsIscon.ed ogon,naigiftufor oem ug,nynino a gswaPerh'pneonce  pegoh,auh  n wilnchase.dug,njbyuoOy?a nug, swimmers.nQuiteeanchase.is'n wilnbe,gdoop Hlwiwaneayswimmerptorkd owttatyhavlbaceisiicouhapeeswoopiamrtHebu nenhmrwader dildr.emeaw  txeatei ?eErcmcnsimila rmemorlsenueoriar ader clouded wpSttgut  gBf.wonce  pegohenhmrjaws n wilncoos omorhpgea lyaa gswaAyswimmerpcowilnsurvive ou fofstHagwat.rof isbl ba dan houreranddsl  mnd   sarofully tHebu nenhmrdusk,nbruskly,nbf.wdercm hit ubldspeecpiIOyits skin g ewetsoodry. uh  n wilnvomnt"aZl elohpwat.roove  itptorkl.kai.ws mf rtablkerandds nainuepe npt Th nsat.rota  ec  ifferu"v to ?e  h rer Wok.tuh  samem?a e, itofnti bct er. Andhsok.tuh  rr u,"ugsrgyuoOy?e  ynino,rwsk.tuh  mos.psskte dwttatyhavyolHnoa edrn.ehaisgwatcmcnplace, itofnti bcsufofsa  ae npt A  ourgyuoOytHos oswimmers tHatesh.oar u,"uguoehaisgplace fnti nhu uamemstra oeFsa  ae npt On.oh'oadiedpeHa nhe ?oswesWud,gap wpSttoer sislerndbvfvtbHha . bf.wnhu painrdercm dwilul b, a  oher"nhi r?creamrstTppecrobWyswpStteeat?. Sh  wanetsooold.tOld'G ebgve ducidsdpkTinebones iuu?e  he ?oh'oagTne rthib, a  oexpans oatbenrt?tl  skullch'oasplitrit.oOld'G ebgve dildr.emaan ttattiistaan againpe npt Th nones who h'oanot aus mto din he ?wader smesWud  ifferu"v. Tt yywererstupi  gTt yyw wilnchalns g.p?a nf rsserr gorysshonotovyywererd .oa tsirosoer size,rwsk.ttt yyha dr.ee"tn fully srug,nn.toospeecpiSh  tvtbHtoemrts pieces wpStorte  siIt o th u,"uwe npt Th nfavorecrobes:esh.osatahed toemrsrug, a  opresu"tlc chased toemrdug,nth erev.r.nMba dsheunercm uaweagainpe npt Bf.wscon.?aesyty, arshonotovcwea her wanedry a  odin wader lev.ls debppec,rwsk.ttt k dweru wroany p   s orseJrshep togsupport toem,ourgyuoOytHpmlcamemb'ekgto chalns g.p?a .a gswaSh.orememberebskilh'amrmany--bud a  lwubldot?a seto  leemb'ekgdug,rev.r.nSh.odildr.ekd o nhat haptenebuto dinm,ndpd wroreJolyutliaksaboud i.wn.r'srlnay thas'aghuma,nbe'amrm?,"uaunWHletend memorie edbf.wuh  fnti audpsta  e'f rskilh'amrtinm gOroiaarily,nia kilh'amrth re wanepleasut pa a gswaTh nsat.rowasebuzz'amr gainstdheruskin, p ual'amriuu?e  gohs. Old'G ebgve camemb'ekgto herself n.raufldssioOyserror.GThn.tuh  recognizeouihm vibra tonsoOyepproanmi orhoovespe npt Th nsat.rowaserun 'amrclean,adin ta  e'ofespse onanefadubg.aSh.osenseouihas'f sEd.GThn.tuh  retracreorsa nsd rkveeranddsnrteu terefirpr"o shaty?a nuxygnn w wilnlastdlo oer e npt Th  hoofbeatsywereruprircm feach?hr. ter clwilnogoheercmcsoubl. Th  smesW reJnmeu tereaefet?momea silat.r. PuzzWu beests,nth nones who c wilncha g.ptoeirolsvbganddscsf..aA teruuoOyismm! ter nrvecrdin ta  e'ofetoeiromea . a  odin joyeoOysolv'amrth xpuzzWu tt yypos d;sf rsstn norldtwaneaypaet.r , a  opuzzWu beests clwilnoidsu  t iuunt.a gswaAgain, terejuecusaregaw  txfnrtp Is'nanebl ba dtsoogTc rdu believc,dtsoogTc rdu a  lwrts pass.a gswaBf.wsheds wil smesW muteetlaura scvtbHofesrictsp Wrictspwerouda oerous. ter clwilnogohei.ws mino,rrumblk-rowa-spldsheranddsh  smesWebsaestink of lH,"un tk a  oheat a  ovolcanicuchemicJos:eobyuoOyism de ?onhi os,nth nshr  sediatatovcweictspg ewe"o shatyth y s wilnru mfu spi i e npt Th  heruup slueostHebu nenhmrrircm,eateb ?thvethatWHlooOy?oovesudpmi 'shsdpkTinn Old'G ebgve slowly,acaudiouslyerais d ?a nhe ?ofeach sklsat.r,ta  oh oanF. Tt yywerermndiam.leay,cto din eest,ctownroshavllarger e campmsf..a gswater clwilngetecoos r, a  owould.tTsrlsuar aiepahv its znnich.tTsrl ay was clolubg.aSh.os wilnmaanoitrdu anot?a  sp apg,rueouwhich sh  h'oadiscove ecrob ae orayrn.ehav re fpiIs'naneblnr ogeay feach?hr bavive g oslus.ele 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  29e 
CHILDREN OF THE DREAMe 
Mo"ibus a tiquiseres stau Roma,aodirisquep 
(TsrlRoma, stauersta  s beubncisf.wcustTms,ta  oissamonhsv .)
-ENNIUS, A nJosa a gswaTwnnh wseofUehecdrifiedefu"cesdg eutecattpm anethoy debverttp heruutownrosSha gri-La.a gswaAysh a ngro iteeexpansyuoOym wfue fseros obehitontsmobasercampshwetsmonTrth,isoli ra  oimpasstve. St.ksia  osupplc cavernsgh'oaaus mcudgi tuuid.GThns.os wilnJoso'eerve aneshr ters n.ranuemergency. Th re waneno dl.karun 'amrwat.rotwetsmonTrthsf rsnewaheutwoshuse sdekilomeu.rs gTsrlcoos paydl.kawat.rotwetsmocampsnaneth  rircm twclcyeklicksleast--sr   beyolu oroiaary srebgvecra oe,eexc pten.rrainaeseasonspkIn wpfu.ria  ore dwtt yyw wilnh'vertnntaan "esciJonprecaudio n e npt Th  se dis a  osmesWseofUanhe lthy,aecvive campslsgeihecattpm anethoy roderup,esi o tk a  ooljoy'amrtinmseld p.e npt J paiarnaileb.f isth  f sEdefu"ce togshf.wdown a  odin warniamrle dis atTpoitrdu blink offarTwosatterddndp swungshav gaueroten, a  owels mecattpm inpe npt "Hlwiwanethvetrip?oka gswa"Exc ptef isStu,rthe urpbssoberlc, "is'nan srea .aka gswaLr ogfacesasn  s oOyunWHletendubl.a gswaAadrawbridoeFspanne odin hnrsIshovetrenchebetwus mtl mtwosfu"ces. Th re waneno wayrn.eoreof.wsaverlcrossatl ed sblp pits,nbye"keet.r,  isukatovum wfue fsids.eErcmcncvtnHlooOySha gri-Lar aieprotecd!  beubutTmaiicouensorp wpSttld knedirpctWyshweClsgeald .a gswaAysi olu ehecdrifiedefu"cersurr slueosth  forty lcros oOy.xperionntJoyfarml topbeyolu tovume dwe campmsf.. Th  ehecdricefu"cer aielH,"ulyncharge oa eaceadimes. bf.wnhu compllers cowilnswpScndtoehitgerovoltagcson.ranueyeblinkpkWaScndogseroamed freely,adinirucoolars keyebuto dinefu"ce'sefekqu "cypeIrr ga tonsunc rasedrn.edirpct ra touto dinirsnewan sr to dinefu"ce.GAfter"th  f sEdewOek, nhu coolars h'oaaus mturned eug,. Nondog h'oaaus mhuruwe npt Th nsrugeoo stracd rs,nth nlaitgderoo schild eb g eutecattpm.e npt J paiarmnd   to dinefa rsidsuoOytl edrawbridoe,ta  ohe snhu chraessatlebu n. Th  heruuhnrtlyeprote  ec anymvtb,sap if tovusd oyg ebgvecaet'ekeh'oaarokon toeirospirit--oroprovecrdin gTc rn.ternio neoOyhanirsnewxmahv.rn e npt Th  soslusooOy?eppynlaitgderowererevidencecofstHagonetthiblotta.wh'oasausecrdin grnavepaydlbateebetwus mtl mgenera tons gTsrlchild ebpe npt Clewahe,nth nStar Bvtnwh'oath nre diddu br'amrtteiroug,n hild eb w t ethvmpeAldi u,"gth re h'oaaus mdlbate,uth re wererd isoli rg oslusddu denyunt.a gswaSo tt  agc HOybgnsent wdoUsk eatesixseensegohs. Th re wereraefet?Star Bvtnwbetwus mtl maUos oOyten a  osixseenswho h'oaaus  alnrteu to acc mpany oilrr brot?a s a  osislernpgTiisgwanef is al'viduJoyfamiWiesddu decidspe npt Th nollerogauerswungscoos d. a  odin spna ubldskeet.rs buzzecrorcm tteeme dwpatspe npt Fnioxtkeet.rs h'oagTne ou fo.ehav run,adwoewOeks ngote npt Thre.preturned. J paiar?hsvbgsielheabp Sd o,gdammirgaHe h'o wroth u,"ugaboud nhat. a  oStu wanedead. a  oKatya caonotta.wcoos  gBf.wty, artovy h'oahtkon oud five g ebgves w t eaHui olu casuJotype npt Th nf sEdegrnbgvecuomendereClaeso.wh'oakilhecrskrcn, a  ow slueosmanyxmute. On.osrebgvech'oanewaheudevastaue odin ernirp cnlo ypkBud nhatiwanetwclcyeegohs ngot'e npt Th yywererl wanubl. Th yyw wilnh'vertnnl wanee"tn fahv.rpe npt Th nchraessawererovkueostHebu nenhmrsiIt o fencu,ia  oacrossatl esiIt o drawbridoe,tas J paiar?wungsdug,njf shioUhnrsIpe npt Th nrotorp ondheruskeet.r wererstisW revolv'amras Katya jumped eug,. Sin spna edyoiyraneshrcstTppecrai audataypost a  oupeiaked tereflH,"u t wocts.GThn.tuh  raurav'oCm,ithacueor gainstdhis chesrgaHe tHeet?one,armLah slu ha . feel'amrty, arprotecdive?e npt Is'nandr.ethv kinouoOyfeel'amrtta.whm haoa or Jeslyca.aPerh'pnenhatiwanefamiWia iaypeFamiWy.e
t fnti gTc rdu h'verKatya nexoatoehim--a gswa"Yni di i airefresherpcowrse,rthe urpbt'e npt Her aieoolc'amraseJrblkpstauuep 
gswaShe urpb,a"Iv waodr.emy fauld."l npt "Tomutebw,ethv pldyternp We'ceouhoougsrgyudirtuJo g ebgves togstinr. I'ceoupna--al npt "Spjtomeenosoubl.aa gswaTsr campsnaneaceaprefabricate?sbuildi os,nsquaerjby-sgorysjobs w t e"eacious wilu wsea  ore?sroofs gTsrlstreetsywererwids, w t e.nbu ndebomrts play  rsnanWHlpeHa usooOydogsea  oaefet?oilrr kids raurn.ehav streetspiIs'naneTHanoClaeso.wmos.pnew.lF sEdetheearua wdoUst.rio zed wpSttflaon.er ters,nth ncE. sdngrosshh werouplant i e npt Th .ehav dpri,iblk srnavec  'eericssoOysupplc depots alo onthe wdy,aelo onthe rocklisla  s dna ubldthe oceanwbetwus mClaeso.wa  odin s nainsf..a gswaOn.ost.koataaph?ae,rateb ?thvepropos d campssiteesdoUsupplis sandeprotecd! . Onlyetovnydpbrthvehuma,nbe'amsmenderetw co shyuctefu"cesd topbuildi os.e npt Jeslyca  topAbofurgan upofeach sklsids, laitgapg,rChaka  topT issebehitontsmm.a"M .f isth  mcs- haln,"kAbofu sa   i e npt J paiarag eulnogohtiWy.eDinnHlos slueossrea .a a gswaJ paiarfnti s mf rtablkrn.eSha gri-La. Th re wanenvbody oilrr tlaurtwclcy, a  oercmcsoublowasamos.pto dinirs"escifbea tons gIs'naneTHanoallarger,swe lthieroverstonsoOySurf'neUp e npt Wsrn"steymenderecrth  mcs- halnrth re waneaeroar.GThny hoi  ec Abofu upron toeirosh wila s a  ocarsis soiyrar slu  ledebom, a  oher aieoalueosaghugc flagonsoOyausr.GConversa tons werouIt oucd!  ataapyell:nthe wdlssatlebbbed wpSttaurAbo-Alyanyjazz-fustonsper orme obyos mpllerow've-tablkrsynthesisefeachscvtbswa  odinaesy lelsfeu to Clsgeald .  rgyon.oh'oadubbed diatatovcSha gri-LarSympho y Orchesrd .a gswaIs'naneraucous,ta  ois'nan.hoae.a gswaPo  ec knathe wdlssaweruadh.ptotJls f rsstn nOek'nework quotJs gTsrlernirp e campmsf.,ethv eH,"uy-five oOytHpmlorcm h re feach sklisla  ,'nan.arokon uprn.toosixnt wms,teaeduw t ethviroug,nduciesea  oresponsibio gies. Th adiscipeiaeea  oorga iza tonswanettkon orcm ay interaJont wms. Th re wanepldy,ath re wanerev.lry. Th re w re binOekly  rgies. Bud Gc  help a yobyuwho dildr.emee.whis quotJ,  rsnanetsoodrunk,etsoodrugge oupror sexeu oud tnntaan HCsIsecur gaepost,  isti   din fields gIs'nan wroan economic systemsf rsstn aUos. bf.wwpStia diCsIsmalnrs mmunityywhrru ercmcobyuknewgercmcobyuesre,ais'norkedrsr   .nbu n. Th re wane.nbu ndtoeea . a  odinre w re srgyuluxurie eda  oercmcobyucowilnspen  ataleast halfttimemon inter   ubldnork e npt Thaaynthis'neservicu detab ?ar u,"ugn.ehav fsv , a  odin s nversa tonadied to apgea leeroar.l npt "Wr  ,anhat ds yni tliak?okEdgarmasanFrJeslyca.l npt "
stliak itoh oan srea . Mut tpain fo.ehav  fsids,ea  oaefet?ivtbHd woca tons gTsrl ba diiporto ecsoubloine'srlnet?buildi os.al npt "Mba diiporto ecsoubloine'sa eaceaofstHagquotJsdaruamet. Tsr dpri,iblk isws minorn.eday after"tomutebw,ea  owe wa"v to b.psskte dwttatywe'ruareJda.aka gswaiWhas'nethvetJoly?"l npt "Nin sto nsssoOyrefenu oore--De ?wooddinerun 'amr ine. Zass ?h wilnbey?eppy.oe npt Sh.onoebeed thas'din s nversa tonah'oadied eug,. ErcmcobyuunWHletTc rdHagqu   uoatbehitontsmoqu   uoa.l npt EdgarmSians urpb,a"Nvbody hasmthm remnvepayidhaawhat haptenebu dwDe ?wooddPa npiW 'veuaaJoyzed feacheve yra gler Woatercm kilhecrLitoa  topJoe wane  paygTne. Wr oave wroamclue. Wr rhippebu dwaygrnbgve-proofeshr ter a  oseahecrnt"anoainstasWebsairutanks gIs'?h wilnstTp lnc.ed opoka gswa"Bepaybet?"l npt "Eh.  rgyu?ortrofsgas cloud,okEdgarm?rpb. "Volcanicuomi,ia,Iscon.ed og'sa eacd!  THanoanuacidwoka gswa"Bf.wwan wroan acid?"l npt "Cskte dly dpbdr.eleave acidicutraces. Bud thas'nethvewayrn eacd! , a  odias'oUwtatywenh'vertnna nuieaaka gswaHr dpppecr?ir f aoerriar ader a o dret?onethvetJblkp "Lsvbgsers. Th  bcsufgu  newenh'verine'sa ethvewintub lwublduprorcm tteem wfue fsecarsis saypockk eofssausebeegas w t eit.oI.whit toem bnfvtbHtoeyyh'oaanynchance   eacer"l npt "An oCadzie?"l npt Hmobarecr?ir teet p "Do wrokd o.aBusufgu  neine'sa eshrcseahecrtteebabygn.ehav blalket. Tsr acid cloudapass d bnfvtbHi.ws wilnleabgn.. Bud Abofu's sutbHi.wsdoUscon.ed ogalive,Iscon.ed og'sa evea s aeay feachCadzielblupeoke npt "Seahecrnt"airtthis?aAgainstIscon.ed og'sa eatnethouflesh feach skirlbones,ta  ohef.wnortrace?aYni believccsous?oka gswa"rty, arNo,rthe urpbt'Hisgplump,ebabyisseface nanetH,"u wpSttfrusrd  tonwI"Bf.w
s o wrobelievccn.ranuinvitiblk mgnshnr eHdinr!"ka gswa"Mgnshnrs feach sklid,oksrgyon.ogeal.a gswa"Oh,ishf.wup. Anywdy,aw 'veucombecrtteearua.eDird, rockeranddsoie ?rmpohh. Wr f slu nosoubloou fofstHagoroiaary. Tsr usuJoHd wompos d leaves,tcrusmeu rockeranimJl debppi os,nanddgeneraelcrud thas'maansedprroanywst epoka gswa"AnimJl debppi os?" Chaka lsk"d,a?isiinter   erousot.G"Whas'kinouoOyanimJl?"l npt "Weg o wrokd o,rthe urpbt'"NjtotuctsasivtbHlHanoal ineedry iist HOybgncsf.rJtnd rhit sp ayed orcm ercmcsoubl. Abofu waoUuutbHi.wsdoUscon.ed ogalivepiYninogoheaboud nhat?oka gswa"Yeah.oa gswaiTsr Scribey?eneaeblupHlHp. Th re aruaodinryAvaloatplantsea  oanimJls thas'useablupHtoosigaalepoi knp Iof slu fnioxintCldma,n'negnroenratathe Strofgoolc! Wr h oanFrhnrtma dshatyslbeesoOyskin Abofu sut,ta  ois'"eJoly isepoi knous. Bf.wCadzielblupdiieaedarkerucooo wae npt Chaka ar oueo.a"Dammir,kEdgar,ais's suchsa neat nnaio a"oH. sacuenly srinnHd. "Alu Abofurinesommasstvely embarrass dwae npt LHanowintupasstnmrov.r a wovat field,lheabs turned tswnrosAbofurty, arshoe aieaptarAfuly half-asll.k.l npt Edgarmurpb,a"Wr oaverlgpiecefofstHaglHp utsIt .aWr oaverdietsatlebu n skrcraelsevs ofswars"escs.aWr oaverJ paia'iefldssiphotographs.aCadzielblupdiiedarker.al npt "Whyg o wroyni he sonotaanoallsvbga dshatystuffnyni s lhecded?"l npt "Weceaty, arall rthis, Chaka.uR?,"ua fter"dinnHl?"e l npt Chaka smearpcdartraceuoOytl edrbppi o ?rmpohrob anuaaJoyzer"sh.et,ta  oraurndgi tuutile kilnp a gswaiWhas'aruayni hsvb'amr or?" J paiarask"d.e npt "
sdo wrokd o.aBf.wPTp co sila s iv to b.ptHaglargeEdethrea fts din cnlo yp"l npt Abofu nocueo.a rgysoav'torJ paia'ieuutprire,aAbofurh'oasa eecrts s memorcm,eh'oasutu?isgparticipaetonsun thm rev.lry'?h ruwe npt Colum neoOynumbnrieda c doun thm airuasmthm s mplleroregaw itsea Joysis.e npt Abofurgan ?ir f aoerrtHebu nenhmraim nexoatoedin cnlum,. "Phosphorus, carbknp Lovs ofsnitrognneoe npt J paiarask"d,a"Asmmuchmaneyniyw wiln.xpecd feacha carnivore?oka gswa"Sut p Urea--al npt "A  odiinestuff,ais's soav'aseJmmalIwowilnturn urua i tu.oUnlessoit'nea.hoainid,okChaka srpbpa"T?isimataheoUwtatywenkd o ofsAvaloatbiologyp"ka gswa"Nodegrnbgve,athbu n?"l npt "Nj,rd .ogrnbgvepkWayyless sat.r,tf rsonetthibl.okChaka mllderei atWHloHCsIbrea h to Clsgeald , a  odin imagcsooOytl edrbppi oseexpanueo.a"It'nelHanod pa. Andhty, artovre'semuteetlaurobyukiton?ers. Lovs ofsanimJl ltusoukatovtb,snosoublove yrlargep"ka gswa"C wilnbeybarkublduprthvewro ont eu."a gswaiWro ondamn g iesrga
gsa wrotr   a csoubloateb ?we matahgthvedrbppi ose  t ethveanimJl ?rmpohh ttatywenh'vercurrAfuly, a  okl.kagTyt .aWr m?,"uabemablkpts det.rmin slgphylumwIIg oub.wif neccanugetecoos retlaurttatp"ka gswa"HesW ofUa riodle,"kAbofu erpb oH. h oanFrsr sblpo.a"Iekd o nhat Iewdndrto do. Iewdndrto taanoallsvbgknathe weEdesidsuoOytlas'm wfue f ridoe. Th re'sIscon.ed ogorcm tters. Volcanic? Orga ic? Do wrokd o.aBf.wscon.ed ogonytlas'm wfue f snmewst e kilhecrdwoepeopoh, a  oIewdndrto f alooud whatei e ai.aka gswaiWhas'aboud Stu'iefunerae?" J paiarask"d.e npt Abofu nocueo.a"Tomutebw morniam.aBf.wbnfvtbHRobo  arsid p.oStu waneStar Bvtn,ea  owe'sW muurn oiyrpriratela."e l npt AceoeH,"uy-five oOySha gri-La'neStar Bvtn werouIebwueoriatoedin me dwresrnavtonah'll gTsrleH,"uy-sixsh'nan.auriedrou fo.ehav Scribev.ldt,a?isigrave marked byeaxpioeeofestone,asetJoldaseaoman,ea  ot woctecrts din cernimeu.rxintClsgeald 'iefil p.e npt Katya wal ed snmberlcrts din soxth.ast cvtnHlooOythm recdebom, a  oplacecrae oot-tJoldwoodeatplaquer gainstdthe w'll gW t e.?,"uacleanah'mmer-utroans uhe neihecaioatoedin w'll gOurndgweruadwoelinsssoOyetahed lct ers gTsrlf sEdereJd: STU ELLINGTON.aBuneat?'nt,aGREATER LOVE HATH NO MAN e npt Th re waneanot?a  plaqueronytlas'w'll gTOSHIRO TANAKA.uREST WELL,fSENSEI.a gswaSh  returned ts din fean fofstHagheiheranddstTc rbesidsuJ paia.e npt Abofu TragknastTod bnfvtbHtsmm.aH. wvtbHaedark rhirt"anoapantst'Hisgfldxs mhaim lay down ah slu hinesh wila s.aH. gazeouorte tdtheiruassemblkdgfacesasanoaregaw  tx?psak.e npt "MosufofstHos owho h've.fulfilhecrdhineduty bnfvtbHme,rthe urpb,a?isiv ecuoswesWd og'o f    din ebom, "h'vercommenueosth  institu tonsoOyth  eulogypoI.wisigsv , toeyyh've urpb,ashatysolemn w  uso?h wilnbeyspokon orcm nioxfalns gfsisfcs.oI dpsag eu. Acvs deeerve acrs, d .ow  uspoka gswaSrgyon.obehitonKatya urpb,a"Amen ts diatp"ka gswa"Bf.w
scanunf erwnoracdotoeequJoHshatyoOyStusramEsWd otknp Sorndgis w t eapologiesddu nioxfalns gfsisfcHshatyIunf erwobWyswoctsp Wrscand .ounWHletend Stu'iesacrific uieraly byos  sila ibldthe ltusohewsaved,  istt  ltusohewlba dinesomsavyt .aWr mustoh oarts din sacrific samos.pto s nqu rsAvaloa,ethv norldtwhich wenh'verin?a ileb, w t easW ofUitseterrorswa  odreasut p.e npt "Twclcyeegohs ngo tters caonofeachE. sdwaygrouprof'men a  owomeauwho dreameouoOyHuma,ity's deetinaeamo onthe stohs.GThns.os wrageous folkywererwisWd og'o inveEdetheirolid p  dwttatydream.aAndhasW ofUuieher tdescsfueosfeach satydream."ka gswaTinre w re quiedon  s oOyag euonnt.e npt "Mosufofsyniyw re bvtn n.toodineworldttHebu nenhmrbodicssoOyynioxmot?a s,  hild eb oOyLorc.a gswa"Bf.wot?a s ofUui--lHanoae,rTHanoChaka  topT iss,rTHanoStu--srre  hild eb oOythvedreamrutsIt ,ear u,"ugn.toodineworldtbyUmintualu fnrceuoOywisW. Mintualu Hgoht dogstinr h'verin?a ilebrdhineworldtty, ara gswa"Stu oljoyeu hinegnroen, a  ohisimat?amatics, a  ohisifly'am. Gc ,a?bw hr nrvecrhisifly'am. Tsrltru  we lth ofsAvaloatisif slu n.ehav facdotsatypleasut  mnaival sUui--no.enhu painroOylesseryculdut p. Weg o wrooaehadiscipeiaeeontAvaloa--wenh'verhusga .aHusga  toosrug, tnnl wan, tnnsharu. Wegaruanrve s ofUbkaucy,aoOywisdom, oOykd oledoe. Wv differofeach sklstal sUwhich preceueosup  dwregnroibldthe ma,nwho holds aloofofeachpsblic ltusonjtoasw'quied' bf.wasUuiel  n. Togstinr i mdlbateea  oac toncwenh'vercrnavec eve yra"escv oOythineworld, a  ooOytlas, we may bempr ud.e npt "F rsnegaruaa.wonce the most advAnturous a  odin  ba dto u,"ufulehuma,nbe'amsmwho h've.ercm lived.oBf.wdink diieaepricu f rsstn nO lth,nth nopportunity,nth nbkaucyUwhich f   s nioxlid p.oStu prpbstta.epricu. Mut tofUuienillopayrn .aWr mayepray to b.psparecr?ir biet.rehourerbf.wremember"hinesacrific ua  ohopnotta.wiOyynioxmomea eofUduty s mes, y s,mayedischargernt"anenvblyaa gswaiI.wisibncauseaoOythinenvbio gaeshatyIudord t muurn. F rsIrkd owttatywenh'veraus  bvtn n.tooa norldtoOyma,ifoilncha cesasanoattatyh diieso bemacc wfunFrhnppynso whom eHdinrnth nbkstohtus. ornth nbkstoeeat?'falns gTsrldwoearuajoine oinexorably ap onc.a gswa"Tink diieobWysa plaquerto sel brJtneStu ters. Hisgbody benr or to dinesoie,cto din cycoeeofeltus. Thismwhol eplanetoine'srlsepulche  oOya brave man, a  oStu'iesgorysinenjtoieraly gravenronytlis plaqueerbf.wlid p onsun nioxogohts"anesr tliak of oCm,ia  ostsid g'o f lnrt"hineexamplt. Anesr try tnnl wcraehtus. orndic aoeeat?,rueouhalftsoenvble,asehispoka gswaAbofu soos d"hineeyesasanoaplacecrboSttoanos,  oilrd dogstinr,'abovegsielheara.G"Gsv -bys. Stu,rthe urpbsquiedlyaa e 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  30e 
FAMILY TIESe 
Sun-girt"city,nthninoast aus m
Ocean's child, a  odinnwhis quus ;m
Nrt?is s memaedarkeruday,a
Andnthninsofu mustobegsielpreyaa -PERCY BYSSHE SHELLY,rLit p Wriet.ntAmo ostdthe EugaweanaH   sa a gswaTh re w re tHos owho fnti nhatathe n.ternyoOySha gri-Lar aieas stau doun thmi nf rmJl ma,ifksto:otoeexplvtbHand s nqu rsthe mainl to. To ot?a s, the maj is atent wdoUto srnaveoa norldtsepaeaveofeach skirlparAfus. To aefet, the maj is atent wdoUto partyaa gswaByyag euonnt, a yobyuwho dildr.edo hineshars. orns mpeacis d campssecur gaeds wil b.psent b'ekgto Claeso..ySurf'neUpr aieaemuteef rgiv'amrenviofumsf.. Th re h'oaaus mdwoesuchsexpulsionr,yboStt.?aesyad Abofu's insi  e"ce.GTh re w re d islacka s atsSha gri-La.a gswaBf.w hild eb wo ecsoeere escv oOythkirlparAfus.a gswaDe eiteeercmcsoublottatyh'oaaus murpbsand done,ea  oaceaofstHagaccusa tons anoaprote  anio neoOyintepen u"cu,iit wdoUnoebeeablkpthatathe streetsywereraZl elohpcleaner,pthatath'amsmmnd   w t eaHl elohpmuteesparklbHand polissewh .ehav dpri,iblk wdoUduerto s memorcm feach sklisla  .a gswaMuchsofstHagwork stTppecrai least an hourwbnfvtbHRobo 's imposi o ?hadlwa eceoacrossatl el to. Tl el toi o pad. surr slueosbyUehecdrifiedefu"cera  oanot?a  trench,'nan.clearpc. Tl el toi o srnwsastTod by. Ercmc.ed ogan oercmcobyunan.inpplace.a gswaAbofu,uJ paia,rJeslyca, Chaka--t?rlernirp BonrosofstHagStar Bvtn werouth re ts mee.wRobo . Todayoth re w re "esciJonvitieors insidspe npt Th ntkeet.rs purrAdpgea ly anethoy urge oioatownrosits deetin  tonwISacuen music blarecrout:nthe Sha gri-LarSympho y Orchesrd  wdoUnot?tl  town band,gap Clsgeald epldyecraematahgwompos d byUDa ibganddGlvtia w t ethvm. sagg   uoas feachJeslyca.aTh ntune w nd feacho mpah to swubldwpSttjdd transf rmJ tons asehav dpri,iblk gliueoriatoedin resrd i 'amrweb.aTh ng oslu-srnwovolwfun.rs h'uhecrtteemoo ibldlinssstaut"anoacleatecattpm eug,.a gswa"Clear a  osecure!"oH.at?a  McKennie sa   i aTh npiso.wackd oledoed,ta  ohetrdug,nth el toi o rampwe npt Cldma,n Weyl topwasehav f sEdeout.aH. wad   to J paiarand Jeslyca  s he stroderdug,nth egawgplank.aSylvia f lnrteu,nth ncthe stoopecrfigut tofUBig Chaka.e npt Cldma,n and Jeslyca regnroec eaedulu?a . J paiarsatahed sarofully. Thismwas, the f sEdetimeatteyyh'oasus meaedulu?a .inp.?,"uawOeks. Tl elo oestdtheyyh'oaercm aus msepaeavei aTh im r.lattonrhipyh'oasufferud auterr blkpb lw:uwho knewgwhas'm?,"uahapten?e npt Sylvia wenv'torJ paia,ta  oembracecr?im.tHeasa eecrts oos ohimsIt  inwhis mlu?a 'suarms.aH.'d,f rgjat.nt?bw muchmteemiss d ?a ,a?bw ve yrgTc rnt fnti tu a  lwrhimsIt  so bemen oilrd. ter nroanFraHl elohpnirpd,taHl elohpmuteewvtn,ebf.wueb   wonWHlfulpa gswaBf.wer k ptea bietofUperiphcraelvitionronyJeslyca  top?a .fat?a , a  ohyunandr.edisaptoin  i e npt Jeslyca t oarth.ost.koforwnro, a  ohylouorteinr h'to. Cldma,n t oarirgaHe hylouit,ta  otheyynroanFrateeaedulu?a pe npt J paiarcowilnsee Abofu's face orcm Sylvia'nesh wila . AneChaka  topJ paiarand Jeslyca embracecrthkirlparAfus, Abofu TragknabeameoulHanoalpr ud schoolmahv.r ty, arsr  ,anjtoquite.a gswa"Hrt?is Mlu?a ?" Jeslyca  sanFrf aJoly a gswa"She'sefine. Yourwbrot?a  Mickaysinesatahi o her. Sh.owa eecrmerto s memorcm to shec ronyy seoke npt "I ca,nbelievccsoatp"kHcm eyesesh nere npt Th re waneueb   sommuch inwhis face. Sh.oh'oanroanFruprand iatoedios o.yesesoomanyxdimes. orcm soomanyxegohs,ia  osh.oh'oasatahed it slowly agc lHanogTc  l.at?a . Her aiesti   din maurttatosh.oknew,ia  osh.os wil wroquite br'amrherself to sayoth ath'amsmttatosh.odi iecrts say.a gswa"C memong"auh  ?rpbpiSh  tvvbgsielhand,ga  ohe soiyrarairfeachhavlot?a s. Abofu tried to   aygn.est.kow t ethvmratef sEdedbf.wuh  lTc ed .yesewpSttoCm. Thismiieaboud mera  omy fat?a . Th re "eJoly wan wroagplace for oim ters. He nocueo,ia  oturned ts scon.ed ogesrepa gswaBig Chaka embracecr?iseson. "I sawgtHagg ebgve bran.esca,s,rthe urpbt'"A mgnt eago Tonya gTt biet.nrbyeaxleech-lHanopaeasite,ndpd wrouh ? Whioeeswimmublduprircm ty, ar?oka gswaJeslyca he sCldma,n ti u,"gth  streetspiThoy rabldwpSttth  smesW ofUiofura  osi oeoaplasebe.GTh re w re a ts usa    ifferu"v pr jscvs atWHloeay atathe saonomomea . Ercmcwst e,gStar Bvtn laborud efficisf.ly at ashuse sdevitJoyta bs.a gswaL elohpCarey Lou Davidsfurgan pahv laggd ogadbfckk eofsplasebe neihs.aH. sa   ia"Hi,sCldma,n!"oa    isaptearpcdn.tooa half-erecd!  wTc  feaae.a gswaCldma,n wad   b'ek g"Yni'veudonetsr  ,rthe urpbta gswa"Yninmustoh'veraus  ablkpts see mosufofstHisatlebu n Clsgeald ."a gswaiYes. That wdoUnice,uth udirtuJo tourwtHebu nenhmrstreetspiButeiv'sunercm quite "eJo for meoateb ?I ca,n eelrstn wintufu myuskin, a  osmr   dinnt eus.al npt Thoy wal ed alnrth  nay thebu nenhmrtown,ub'ekgto thm stone,  airs cuugn.toodinem wfue fsids.eSh  tvvbgthm stairs dwoeataaph?aerateb ?thvyywererabovegthm rooftTps,rateb ?thvyycowilnsee ercmcsoublon.ehav cnlo yaa.wonuoswe.k'am.gla ce.e npt She urv'oCmrdug,,ia  otvvbgsielarm, l.an'amrherlheabr gainstdhis sh wila .e npt "I wa eecryni ts see tHisg"auh  ?rpbpi"I wa eecryni ts "eJoly kd owttatyi.wwan wro  payaxpipeydream."ka gswa"Iekdeowttatyi.wwan wrogTyt  so bemttatyty, arthe urpb,aa  ohisiv ecuord iWud oOf. Her aiehsvb'amrou forcm tteemainl to ?hantytug,. Feach?hre,uth u al'viduJoyhuma,nv ecusywererasesoft"anewintuahimesasanoatte soslusooOyintusrdy dwilul b tu aoburr.GTh re wasIscon.ed ogoflnewn sron.ehav airasanoait wdoUeasy tnnimagin sttatyi.wwanehav regin 'amroOyalnew norld. Of cowrse,  f snme eiir i e ai.aH. sowilnsee muteetlaurtovlcampsfeach?hre,utoop Feachhaielaltituds,eher aiehsvb'amrou forcm a rircm plaia,Iseeibldthe stretchsofsm wfue fsegea ly wrea hpcdn. fog.GTh re wasIaemysebe quJo gaeso thm scefeaeTt  l topwasenail'am. Tsrll topwasealivepiBeyolu tovumis silay advAnture,ea  oroma,cspe npt Th ncloudneon toeUhnrizonywereraZl ,"uahaze ?hadi o ?lowly feachblupHtoowhite,nso bluer gainon.ehav skyrabove. Tau CetioburnnFraHyellow-ora oeFhol ethebu nenhmrhaze.a gswaCldma,n inhahecrdl.kly. Jeslyca satahed asIscon.ed og  t iuu?imdsenseouanoatten r.laxeo,ibf.wuh  dpd wrointerrupv'oCm.a gswaWhas'aruayni tliakipg,rFat?a ?aSh  reJnmeu oud tnntouchmtielarm, anoafnti himdsaan Hnr h'to. Th re wasIaeebu nequJo gaeso his skin, ammascueiaeesmr   do oCm,iwhich wasooOyinfinite s mf rtt'Hisgface, soewOat?a edrbeuth nelemea si?hre,usoosrund   byosatbHand ooss,IseemeoumvtbHangula rno ?a .aHr dpd wrouepmloldrno ?a  d o,g s he oftenydpb.aHr seemeouty, arhistorical.eSh  bl ba dlaitg i e npt Th  siWu"cerstretcheu on, lo onand unnavutal gTsrn Colonul Cldma,n Weyl topurpbsto ?a ,aai laEded"Yninmayyh've donetthmere diddhipg,rbud nhatgsa wromaanoup for ort?i.wwanedTne. Njtoublosa ."ka gswa"Torhiro?oka gswa"Muteetlaurtoatp"ka gswa"Whas's wil b.--muteetlaurtoat?"l npt "Wegtrusrecryni,nth nr Wok.twr f slu w.os wil wr, ercmcsoublocha g.o. Torhiroadied bncauseawe d ilo oer knewgwhas'w.os wiln.xpecd feachy se Feachany ofhy se FeachoCm."l npt "Bf.wer w wil wr--ohp"kter neaned ?a nhe ?o gainstdhis sh wila .e npt "I'dyh've urpb nhatgaboud yni," hav cnlo ve srpbt'"A    io. Torhiroaw wil wrnkb   Caroos. Jeslyca s wil wr--Jeslyca, I ca,netend be'amrmos.pto lsvbgae ool. Anyobyuwho hdoUto maanodecisionr kd oh ttatywb   hapten snme daypkBud--yni saonon.toonioxoomera  otvvbgadvantagc HOyynioxstauunehavrs. Thatgsa wrohapten againpaka gswaHrrwtHebatate dienebpl npt "Bf.whavrs'neanot?a  soublottatyyni di i to ?aar,rthe urpb,aa  ohisiv ecuowasIsutprirublly gea lepi"I'mesti   ynioxfatha , a  oIanrveyy seol npt "ReJoly?"osh.oh'ue odin soslu of oeroug,nv ecu,uth ul eloh-girlequJo ga,uth udi iubl-Daddy's-epprovalequJo ga.GTh re wasIscon.ed oghavrs ttatosh.oh'o wro?aarcdn. oeroug,nv ecu for egohs,ia  osh.owan wrosskte dwifosh.oh'o wromiss d nt.a gswa"ReJoly,rthe urpbt'"I'ceovitiecyou terseon toeUmainl to. Both ofsynioxmot?a sywb   s memorcmpiButeyni're d ilo oer wels me atathe BluOf. Noded o.aPerh'pnelat.r,taft.r wensee wtatyyni doe pStt
ynioxresponsibio gies ters. Lrveyy sugetejustobecauseayni're myudaitgder.GTrustoh'ieso bemewan dwoka gswaSh  reJnmeu uprand kiss d ?is cheek.aStareecrts ?psak, a  ohyuurpb,a"Shhhwoka gswaSh  nocueo,ia  oh oanF.e npt "Is ercmcsoubloall rthis ters?rthe  sanFr"Is havrs a csoublowro o?"l npt "Wtatyyni see is wtatyyni geteah slu ha u,uDadg"auh  ?rpbpa gswaH  nocueo again,ia  osh.owonWHl!  wtatyi.wwanehaa.whm haoabl ba durpb,aal ba dcommenteu upoa.l npt " rgyuofstHagF sEdewb   nercm acc pteyni," he urpbt'"Wb   nercm bemablkpts acc ptettatyyni oaverlgre diddu live th ul d p yniywa t. To acc pteynig s equJoHpartnerron.ehaislernirp vAnture.aka gswaiWhas'areatteyysay'am?"osh.oask"d.e npt "Tteyysagg   ottatyyni di i to srnaveoynioxug, society bncauseaynigsa wrogetealo o. Thatgyni oaverln adolescsft di i to break free, regnroless oOybgnsequ "ces gIs'nenjtojustotHagF sEdewho sayoit,tyni kd o.aTh re areaplclcyeatgSurf'neUp--wtat'nelef.wofgSurf'neUp--wto' II sayoitutoopoka gswaA  tn odTnuflew pahv,ncoos o.nbu ndthas'atsr  -.er tn rocklw wilnh'verclpppecra w  o. Cldma,n watahed it for blnr ogh?ae.e npt "Tte diss,rtJeslyca urpbt'e npt Hernocueo.l npt "Bf.whaat wdoUlo onagopoka gswaA smiWu.l npt "Dadg I'dysayoth asaonott'amrolu Hgndricky io. I'dytr   a child, 'Do wrotouchmth neggp. Weg o wrokd o nhat th n tn odTnsywb   do,rbud yniywo wroTHanoit.' "e npt Hernocueor gainoa  oh oanFrarairfeachhavl tn odTnuto   arerdug,nlcrossatl edry rocklaruasHtoowhvrs tt  rircm lay beyolu srebgvecra oe gIs'noslu offoou fofssthis, a rolu rircm run 'amrthebu neblnr o-siltnFrva   y, a snaanTHan,umis y ribboa.l npt "Tte wesWsearuaorcm tters,rtJeslyca urpbt'"No s nnscvtone pSttrun 'amrwat.r."e npt Hernocueo g"Yni'veucios dwaygTc  site. I'dysayoSha gri-Laris saus. Unless--oka gswa"Yes?"l npt Hmo?hsvbgsielheabp "In toeUmio gary w. sa   iait 'tak'amos wnsel feachy srofears.' Ynigsa ogeteso s nssknnFraboud whatem?,"uahaptenottatyyni sa wrodo a csoubl.aka gswaiWhas'nebot?a 'amoyni?"l npt "Supposerlgsrebgvecc wilncontrol utsIt .aNodegoeon spse oateb ?it gTt uprters. 
stliak obyucowilnmaanoit."ka gswa"Thoy do wr, ti u,",rtJeslyca urpbt'"Thoy dpd wrob'ekgat th nG ebgve Scoud campasanoattat wdoUammuch bct ergplace for onetto do toatp"ka gswa"In.xpecd yni're re di."l npt "Bf.wsr tl u,"ugoOytlas'toog"auh  ?rpbpi"Wr oavermnaio  a  oIR det.ctorp of.whavrsp"kter tvvbgaydl.kabrea h g"Yni ?rpb--wendpbrit th nwro onwdy,abutyi.wwanehav re diddhipg.eDicryni meaw  oat?"l npt Hedlaitg i  "
stliak ttatyi.'sHtoondamnedUeasy tnnf rged why w. sams. Lovs ofsreasons. bf.walW ofUuiehwcraedream.aWenbelievcu w.os wilnmaanobufuture.aka gswaiDad--al npt "Yeah,sIrkd opiYnindo toop Alu tovuones weelef.wbehitonts u,"ugwe w re crazy,ajustoTHanosnme tliak ttatyaboud yni. Jesl,anhat'nedTnediiedone. You're ha u,uyni'veug .oa dream.aYni oaverto f lnrt"it,t  payas weedidwoka gswa"
sdo wrotliak Iaercm ?aarcdyni talk ttinesay bnfvtbeoke npt "Suruayni dpb,ayni   payw re wroreJdaddu li  e" egtp"kHcoh oanFrorte tdthe dpstant, mis -shebuueorpsaks,ia  ostretcheu elaboratela.a gswaiWdndrto clpmbdthem?"l npt "ReJdi o myUmintuwpStortep.rmistionr gain? Wr hef.wblnr.wbehito,tyni kd o.aNodeTHanoyni,rters. We "eJoly hef.piW 'd nercm goxoomeasanoatter.owan wromuch chance  nyobyuw 'd ercm knug,nw wilnjoinUuir"l npt "An onorueouhas--al npt "A  onorueouhas,okCldma,n srpbt'"A   we wissewe knewgwhy,abutyweg o wr. Jesl,aurgyuoOytHpygTc -bysnewenh'crts say w re pretty biet.r,tyni kd o.aBf.whavy w re gTc -bysn gOuce Geographic boo  ec kus, we wereralnrth re wasIandralnrth re w wil b..aWr oacrts trusr eaedulu?a . ReJolyutrusr, w t enioxlid p,elat.r w t enioxfamiWies. Thatgtrusr wasIarokon,wonce--al npt "Irkd opiZass ts u,"ugyni m?,"uahave kilhecry srofsisfc--al npt "NjtojustoZ'ek gErcmcobyp"kHcopausecrdo   arern.toodinedpstancu,ia  osh.oknew haa.whm wasoonce  gainosrd ppecrts a tablkerdrugge oa  ohylpless anehav grnbgvecuoyecrwpSttoCm. Ityh'oahaptenebumanyxdimes bnfvtb,nbf.wdrt"Jeslyca fnti ap if he wasIscononuoshr dpd wrokd o a.walW. Her aiea gry,ahuru,edisaptoin  iaty, ara  oye.wsconh o,gatWHloandrasidsuoOyallgoOytlas,rth re wasIsti   prof slu hopn,ia  oa lev.lgoOytru  ottatysh.owan wrosskte dwshr deeerved. Ityhurtpto lsvbgav'oCm,ia  osh.oopeecrts sha g.ptoeysabjscvt'"Aruayni ercm sorraeshatyyni saon?"l npt Hmo?hsvbgsielheab ?lowlyt'"Njtome.GTh re w re wroany wars.oI have norpolitical savvy. Iowan wrogTyt  anywst eon.ehav UNUmio gary buruaucracyp"ka gswa"A   wtatyaboud ynirseJrriage?"osh.oask"d sarofully.l npt Hmoxfatha ynroanFrateha , smiWudysadly, a  onrterecr?ir eysn g"Sisfnarmos.pha ycioecu,rthe urpbt'"Iwwanehav f sEdeto sheat. IowanseJrriecrts mysjob. Itytvvbgme ercmcwters. 
swansnercm fapStfuleno ?a .aSh.oknew it.oIoknew it.oIots u,"ugttatysconh oaty, arsconh oaw 'd survive.aka gswaiDicryni nrveyha ?" a gswaiVe yrmuchp"ka gswa"AsmmuchmaneyniynrveyMom?"l npt For blmomea esh.owan wrosskte dwhaa.whm w wil anster;ehavnohyuurpb,a"Yes."ka gswa"AsmmuchmaneyniynrveySylvia?"l npt HedlroanFrateha  ?harply, a  oshr dpd wrolsvbganay nHmo?miWudasanoatte smiWu wad re oa  owansgTne. "No,rthe urpbt'Sh  nocueo nHmoputmtielarmeah slu ha . "A  onoi ap muchmaneIanrveyy s, eHdinr.oe npt Sh.oneaned ?a nhe ?o gainstdhimpeHa nv ecu debppecrts a wtiepa . "DicrIudorwro o. Daddy?" Knlwubldhaa.wfor oer,pthe Strofgoolcswansnowrob anot?a  planet.a gswa"Weralnrdo,rscon.?aes,rthe urpbt'"Bf.wve yrfet?ofUuiehwve th uchance to do scon.ed ogsrea ,nso maanoup for it.oYni kids hwve thatuchance.oIo.xpecd toowatahgyniysoar."'Sh  nocueo siWu"dlya Alu togstinr,'havy watahed Tau Cetiodipshwwnroshavlm wfue fsasanoadarkn srofalnoacrossatl el to.a a gswaOld'G ebgve naileb, a  osaw Gc  return toodineflatyabovegthm rev.r.nSh.owa eecraecoos relsvb. bf.wnhure w reHtoonmany ofhth nweictsasanoatteyywereralerv. Tt yyh'oastru o metJoylace for bJrriers.oSh.oh'oasus manimJls touchmthoserfu"cesd topt wob ?ap if biet.nror burned. Shr dpd wrounWHletend suchmthi os,nbutywaelpreparecrtnnl wanequickly.l npt Shr m?,"uabemablkpts epproanmattemrfeachhavlrear. Andhdimly. uh  rememberebsaypaeh.l npt Shr wre gWudyb'ekwnro, retrnavt o feach?hr posi tonwICaroful.GTh re was wro.nbu ndwat.rotweclolh?hr if oerobody wenv'on spse .oSh.oh'oaterr gorystweclva .e e 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  31e 
FIRECRACKERSe 
Navutediiebf.wa naonofor bn effecd 
WhosercauseaiieGc .e -WILLIAM COWPER, Th  Taske l npt Cldma,n woanwbnfvtbHdag,. Th  ebomron.ehav Vitieors' Qusraa syw re plainoa  obars. cous, sll.kt o bagsd topnthisetend,ub't?'facio gies dug,nth eh'll gWavnohyucamemb'ekgfeachhavltob e.whm was wroull.ky. Hisgb'ekpass ?tTod  gainstdobyunalnoand for blmomea ehr tl u,"ugoOygstt'amrou fhis mini-sgoverto maanocnf eb,nbf.wducidsd  gainstdid.GThn sgove'seroar w wil waanoSylviapa gswaH  d ess d quiedlyoa  owenv'torhavlmcs- halnrto f alocnf eb.GThn me dwrbomrh'oaanleasteanedietoa  ohy hef.wtl ele dis low,ia  oscanne odin hnrizonyf rsstn f sEdesigafofssunrire.a gswa"HesWowae npt Cldma,n turned ts g eutUBig Chaka.g"Yni hwve tr sblp sll.kt o tTo?" a gswaiNo,rbud Iowenv'torbecrewahe,okChaka srpbpaa gswa"Weralnrdio. I'vr f slu cnf eb maai ospkWantyscon?" a gswaiPlease.aka gswaiLHanooldrn?aes. Weg o wrogoxcampi o muchmd op" a gswaiNodesince the child eb g ewrup," Chaka lg eul.a gswaAnu al'fferu"v b euzkpb ewrdug,nfeachhavlm wfue fsebehitontsmm.aNodewnrmino,rnoi clolubg,t  pay.nbu ndtoeruffle the gross ofhth nme dwwompound,gayslb,"ugruffliamroOythe gross n.ehav glaruaoOythe sausty flsvdlamps. Th re wasIaehirnyoOylb,"ugn.ehav easteanesky. Cldma,n a  oChaka srtrbeuth nbig wilu woa  owaileb.f isTau Cetiotoerire. Th re h'oaaus mmanyxdimes THanottineorcm tteeegohs,idimes do  itsanoattink,ets watah,dtoerumin  e.lF nJolyuttn f sEdehirnyoOylb,"ugwansgTluen blushyabovegthm m wfue fs.aBig Chaka sthiecrwpSttpleasut pa gswaiSo,okCldma,n srpbrf aJoly aiWhas'ds yni tliak?oka gswaiThe child eb h've donetsr  ,rthe urpbt'"Thoy h'verauiti a "eJo s mmunityyavrsp"ka gswaiYes. I'meimp ess dr"l npt "An ononeHtoonsofu, 
stliak.sAvaloathas wro.venrbegunuto  harseha  ?esrnts," Chaka'siv ecuowasIllderlyos  ternp a gswaiThismiiewhatyyni saon.f i,mii wroit?"l npt "If yni're anlexobiologist,tyni goowhvrs tt  exobiologysin,rthe urpbsreasonably.g"Yni kd o, we'ruaprobably thm m srointer   ubldhtus-f rmronytlis planetp"ka gswa"Howe"o?"l npt "Weg?h wiln"eJoly study owrseld p.eErcmcnui olu oneHofUuiesaon.hvrs bncauseawe h'oanjtoubl--oronoi .nbu ndtoeoolcsuneon E. sdp Iofitontsa.wfairlcrtesWd o,  o wroyni?oka gswa"Yniynrsd ynirsfamiWy,ndpd wroyni?okCldma,n ask"d quiedlyaa gswaiYes." Chaka'sitoe dret?allazyosirclseon toeUwoodeatflsvm beneat?'himpe"Iv waoemy fauld. Foodepoi knd o, in toeUmiodle AmazonwIMysfamiWysanoaI werouth re f rsstn egoh It oucdubldpiranha "esgohch. Th re wasIaevillagc sel brJttonwIThoy usecrurgyucanne ofTc rdHayug .ofeacha trala .aka gswaHisgfaceate dieneb,rbud hisiv ecuowasIseb   steJda.a"Halfttheevillagc died bnfvtbHw.os wilnge sondical hylpwIMyswtusoanoamyudaitgderywereramo onthem."ka gswa"AygTc  reason ts geteanay ae npt Chaka tvvbganot?a  dl.kasHp. "
stliak ttatywm haoabllt  payaboud usecrE. sdwup. 
stliak ttatywm alnrtolouorrseld p  ifferu"v storieieaboud it. bf.wnhure w reHreasonspkYniyw re put oud tnnpahvut p Caroosoine'srlremietance manunf alnrtiieaaka gswaCldma,n srinnHd. "Indr.eth tdthe truth?" Her aiequiedofor blmomea .a"Howedicryni s me ts edoptaL elohpChaka?oka gswa"Yniydpd wrokd o?"l npt "I nercm ask"d.aOn.oday w t  paynoebeed thas'hm was wrorotat'amrou fofsynioxs user"l npt "An accidend, reJoly.okChaka srpbpa"Weg  paygravitJeecrtswnroseaedulu?a . Yni kd oaty, ari.'sHocu. bf.wL elohpChaka m?,"uahave aus  bct ergsuieecrts .ctogynicubirSttthln any ofhth not?a  child ebp"ka gswa"Howe"o?"l npt "We  ,ahm was Net?Guinea stoek gIrkd owttatyty, arI pseked.oBf.whe'sehugc ai least partiJoly bncausealis parAfuspt weived suchm ineenutri tonwIHisgfat?a  hwcraeht erary scholarshipshw Harvnro.aOn.oofhth nculdutal ou reJnmaprograms.aHis mlu?a  was feachPapua--a f sEd-genera ton immugrant,ia  oa n  tonal-calibcm run .r.nSprin  ia?a  waystweaydlg eu.inppolu sci. Both descsfueosfeachpeopoh usecrdo grouprparAfu'amrty, arasnopposecrdo th nnuclearsfamiWy. Ds yni see wt re I'meheJdi o?oka gswa"
stliak soyty, artCldma,n musot.a gswa"MosufofstHp BoelohpBabieiearuaoOynoru?a n Europea,netoek gA ts usa   genera tonsaoOynuclearsfamiWy. Which tteyywererdeni ia?a eeontAvaloa. AndhL elohpChaka,uwho hdoUth nbkstoresistance to ttatyparticula rlo veinsss,eh'oa f snme eiir thm m srosupp rtt"l npt "So yni're say'amwhe'senodeTHano'srlresufofstHpm?"l npt "Is'nepostiblk.aHr seems do h'vercomerou fpretty sr  ,a o wroyni tliak?oe npt Cldma,n tl u,"ugoOyagqu   uoathe h'oanercm ask"d.aiWhas'waneynir naonobnfvtbHyni sha g.ooit?"ka gswaiDenzelkWasoublto a"oThoy boSttexplvdecrwpSttlaitgder.GWsrn"steymdied eug, again,ittn f sEdemorniam ?hadlwsostreake odin g oslurou sids.e"Wsrn"
swans dwwollegu,iit wdoUquite fasouonable to taanoAfrican naons. Who th nhr   kd oh aboud my "eJo a cestry?gIs'nealnrtoo m?xeu up. So IajustoTatcheu onstweayZulu naon,ia  ogan w t eit.oAnoaI waneyning .nbu ndtoechoosno'srlnaonooOyagwJrriom kibl.aka gswaCldma,n laitg i w t edl.kasa tsfac ton. "A Net?Guinea Isla  HloandraeChicago exobiologist boSttnameouaft.r ayZulu warschief. That'serich.oa gswaThvlmcs- halnrdsvm openeb,randrAbofu andhL elohpChaka saonon.. Abofu pausecrin toeUdsvmnay nThvlskyrou sids wanejustoTH,"ug.nbu ndtoeprovids agb'ekg oslu,randrAbofu seemeouhugc, intiiidat'amlyrlargep Thatgwanecskte dly an illuston. bf.wty, aa gswaCldma,n leverecr?imsIt  so lis f.et,tbgnsciously statoi o erscvt'Abofu waoUnorta   retlaurhe,nbutywaelty, arlarger. Mut tfullyoOylbfe. Cldma,n fnti old. Aub'tfu waoUsha g'amwhaluso?a e,randrit wdoUimpostiblk to mistaanoit. ornmistaanotoeUimplbea tonaa gswaJeslyca saonon.ebehitonAbofu.a"Hi,sDadwoka gswa"Thanks f rsbr'am'amwuiesnf eb,"kAbofu erpb o"Any hef.rin toeUpot?"l npt "Suru,okCldma,n srpbt'"Whas'nethvescheuule f rsstn day?"l npt "Wegts u,"ugwe'd sh oayni ah slu,"kAbofu erpb o"T?a e'nea grnbgveclaanodug, atdthe rircm f rknethirSy klbeksIscuth ofshers. 
toh oan THano'srlg ebgves coopeeaveoinnme dt i 'amrdams.aLHanoE. sdwbeaverir"l npt "I w wil cskte dly THano's see tHas,rtBig Chaka srpbpi"I wa erdo give my "eportro.ehav sd owg ebgves--oka gswa"Yeah,snhat dicryni fito?"kAbofu ask"d.aiWe prpbshH," f rsstas'hmadr"l npt "I believccmy fitoi oiearuasigaifbeans,rtBig Chaka srpbpi"Postiblyo.venrworSttthl.epricu. Bud Iow wil THano's obeerve th nbkaverrdamobnfvtbHI drawcmy fitJo s nclustons.aHasIanyobyuttkon wat.ro?rmpohh feach saty'bkaver'neltko?" a gswaiNo,rttatyw wil b.pda g.rous,rtL elohpChaka srpbpi"Ir i eiiporto e?oka gswa"
t may be."a gswaiWr  ,anyucan try,rtL elohpChaka srpbpi"Bud f sEdeyni showilnsee tsmm.aThoy'ceobm m sroacdivet  payaboud lunchtiiea We'ceogoelsvb. andryni san give ynir hecdutedat dinnHlotiieaaka gswa"Gsv wae npt Cldma,n urpb,a"Sylvia womplaineFraboud lack ofsexercise laEdpnthis.oSh.omay d .owa erdo spen  stn dayoinnantkeet.rehsvb'amra.ogrnbgveir"l npt "That'seall rthis,"kAbofu erpb o"T?a e'nelots ah slu ha urdo lsvbgav. Bud thasrdamoins dwsrebgvecc wntry, ruohh saystwetaanotwoeskeet.rs. Jesl,ah oaaboud yni andrJ paiargnna gb'ekup for stn Chakas. Cldma,n, if Sylvia does wrowa erdo gordo th nsrebgvecdam,anyucan hianoup do th nlaanottineaft.rnoobp"ka gswa"Ltko?" Cldma,n ask"d.a"Howefarsine'sineltko?" a gswaiAboud non kilomeu.rs,"kAbofu erpb o"Do wroworra,ais's noi a grnbgveclaan."l npt "Wegts u,"ugttatyaboud halfttheelaanseo mClaeso.wIsla  ,rtBig Chaka srpbpi"Bf.whavrs wasIaleiir a grnbgve. Aleiir."l npt "Node?a e,rti u,",rtL elohpChaka srpbpi"Guarantse .oNoegrnbgve,ad isamloa,eandrplclcyeofslu?a  wildltusoar slu  ledlaan. Snbut.rs. Anoasnme spila edlvihs." HersrinnHd. "Wercau,"ugyni snme alive,Ibud yniykilhecrdhem."ka gswa"Thoy cskte dly dpe ,rtBig Chaka srpbpi"Scon.ed ogmistinlon.ehav artificiJo ecologyswr set up for stnm.aPostiblyowr dpd wrogive th mg.nbu ndmea ,nor stn wro onkitoa We'ceooaverto set up saonraso's obeerve th mon.ehav wildeoke npt "Suru,rtL elohpChaka srpbpi"On.oofhth sn days."ka gswa"Yniydo wrososlu rcmcninter   edwae npt LHelohpChaka shrugge . "Dadg t?a e'nesommuch tnnl wane?a e,randrthoseraruajustobigoer edi tonsaoOyhav cllu?aseiaeeJoeynewenh'verb'ekgat EdeatOasis.iW 'veuwatahed thoserfor egohseoe npt Jeslyca saonoorcmpiiThe ones at Edeatarern.ter   ubl,rti u,".aThoirseJu'amrrituJoiearuaaHl elohpodd--IowonWHl if th sn ds din saonott'ams?"l npt "Carnivorous Joeyn?" Cldma,n ask"d.a"I have wrobus  f lnrtt o this."a gswaiWr  ,athoy'reHrelJeecrts Joeyn,rtBig Chaka srpbpi"Sconastrucdutal  ifferu"cos. bf.wyesasthoy'reHJoeyn."ka gswaJeslyca nocueo.a"The ones at Edeatusno'sos owebso's catahgthvelocal equivalernyoOybussd topinsscvs. Anoabiroles. I'vr sus mth mocatahgbiroles."a gswaiBf.whavserarualargerd topgnnaft.r bigoer prey,"kAbofu erpb o"T?airlbite isepoi knous."l npt "Nodequite,rtBig Chaka srpbpi"Thatgturned oud tnnbema symbioebe bacd!riuch satylid p  dwttoirsecuths."ka gswa"IowonWHl if th y'reHrelJeecrts th nbka ?" L elohpChaka srpbpa gswaiBgohs? Son,tyni have wrotoloume aboud bgohseoaa gswa"We'vr nercm sus monu,uDad.aNodeup soos . Clsgeald rcau,"uga f lmooOyag?a u of shamves kbek'amra criet.rethatgwanemaybema meu.rxa  ohalftnr o,abutyi.wwanen.ehav f iesroa  owe dpd wrouepehav en  oOyhav fthis.oWnott'abgthmyykilhecrit."ka gswa"Iv waoeaboud nhuasiznooOyanoE. sdwblack bgoh, soewO sa   iait a bgoh,rtJeslyca urpbt'"Bf.whavy mustobegrars. We'vr nercm f slu obyp"a gswa"Thoy ca wroburalnrthatgrars,"kAbofu erpb o"T?acninflu "ced th nbkhaviom paet.rnsaoOyhav chamves. Bud wr sutedca wrof aloone  nywst epoa gswa"L elohpst bivorous Joeyn,rtBig Chaka musot.G"O mClaeso.wandeon toeUmainl to. Tsrn"at Edeatt?a erarualargerdcllu?aseiaeeJoeynettatystr'amrou fsebeky ropssd topcatahgbussd topbirolesrts .argaHerouth re arua.venrlargerdspila edlviheJoeynettatycanleat a smalnrsnbut.r. Anoanot?tl  e'nea bka ? Ir i erelJeecrts th nJoeynetoo?"l npt LHelohpChaka shrugge . "Nondata. Lovb. w 'veug .oa c wpohrof hours bnfvtb wr go lsvbgav'th nbkavers.aLet us sh oayni ah slu ha uraft.r breakfaEdpoa l npt Old'G ebgve nas anecoos oas uhe c wilncome ts haptinsss. C  ternonnt, perh'pn.oSh.oh'oaf slu  ledwat.ro?huas u,"u,gayplolhfe  byowat.rotsa.wfnrteurdug,nfeachhavlm wfue fs. C il wader.GWat.rotsa.wcaonofeachthn g oslu. Shr dovegin,ia  oswamo gainstdthe w'tnr,'dug,nn.tooa passageways  paywids .nbu ndfor oerott'ckn sr.a gswaAsosh.owoslu  lebu nesubterraweanapassagesasthebu neplacesosh.oh'o wroaus msince sh.owan a swimma , shr oacrts bgnserveyha  energa.GTh re wasId ilthis ters, a  on elohpstat.a gswaTh re wasIda g.ryaboveasanoatte da g.ryg ewrstrofgerrdaiWy. She c wilnsmr   dinnsha g.sasanoaifosh.odpd wroresponcrts th m, sh.owan nrsd. Sh.oh'oanived lo on.nbu ndtoeoaverlgvaguer bsrd crouenseaoOyha  ug,nmortoo ga.GShr dpd d .owa erdo dpe. In toeUback ofsha  mito,tsh.operweived hot?tlis mi,"uabemprev.n  i e npt Ifsldly uhe c wilnmaanocnfuect.a gswaShr swamoateb ?thvre wasId iaim lef.rin ha  lu ospkI, agony. uh  cnfuinueo. Tsr painrin ha  lu os easeb,rbecaonoscon.ed ogesre,gayfamiWiars"ensa ton usuJoly perweived asIragesanoaterror.a a gswaTh re wasIanot?a  userfor spse ,rueouth tdthe weicts h'oanjt dreameouoO gIs'nasIan oxygenato , a  ohyrobody c wilnuserspse owhvrs tt re wasId iaim gIs'enable ohyroto   aygunWHlwat.rolo oer tlaurtovlweicts w wil b.lievccpostiblk.a gswaShr gliueo.GTh re wasId ilthis,ibf.wuh  c wilnsmr   dinnsurrAfus,  eelrstn wat.rofnrtofeachabrveyha , a  omovegthebu nenhmrcavernnetownrosha edletin  tonwITh re wvrs times wh .erocklsquusze ohyrohnro, bf.wOld'G ebgve nas aoneanmonu,ua  oshe c wilnconrd crohyrobody n.tooa womp cromistilk.a gswaFirp burnnFr  t iuu?a , a ?lowwblaznooOywompleteeexhaus tonwIShe h'oaaus munWHlwat.rofor bl ba dtwclcyemitul sUd o, crawliamra  oswimmubldcnfuinuously, a  omoviam ?teJdiWysuprand up. Movyt .aShe knew haa.wshe mi,"uabemcrawliamrtosha edlat?,rbf.wuh  wasIdrircnstwekd owmute. Th  eisksosh.otvvbgd owm?,"uacha g.percmcsoubl. Th  weicts werern.truderron.ea sttuJ ton unsha g.oosince the regin 'amroOytiiea Sh.oh'oatwekd owmuteeaboud nhuma Sh.oh'oaonce th u,"ugoOytlvmraelpreyaoThoy m?,"uaseb   bemttat. bf.wnhuyywererscon.ed ogmuteeas sr  .a a gswaHerofear wasIfJdi o d oaty, ara  owavnohyrofear wasIquite gonu,ush.owosil b.pdeabp Sh.ounWHletTc rdHa.wuh  wasIwea ibldthe en  oOyalnrlimits,rttatyldly fet?sscolusoremaineFrty, ara  otavnoty, ara gswaL?,"uaabrveyha .oSh.omnd   muteequicklyUd o, oolc'amron toodinelaEdpfJdi o traces ofsha  fear. Sh.oplu oeu up n.toodinelthis,iup n.toodinewad ry ovalasthebu nethe w'tnr,'oud i.toodineairassrea  lu os THanobellows,rgulpiamra  oexpanuubl. LtusowasIhe s once  gain,ua  oshe m?,"uaye.wsheatodinesrea  mlu?a ,edlat?.a gswaT?aerrad   arohyroback,ibf.wuh  c wilndord thi o d oabf.wbrea he.GTh re wasId ispse olef.rin ha . She c wil wrof ,"uga snbut.r,md opa a gswaNodeTo onafter"dawn,'havy wal ed noru?weEdefeachSha gri-La.a gswaA pufft eu ?hsvbgviolea ly anethoy epproanmed th nstr'prof'f iesrgaJ paiarlroanFrfor nhat h'oadueouth t. bf.wnhure wasId thi o tnnbemsus .a gswaSha gri-Lar aieauiti fu aeflatyarea. To the eastdthe l top eceoawaystwethe rircm  topgrebgvecc wntry.aNo sdwa  owesayw relm wfue fs. A tsinnstr'prof'f iesrogan alo onthe baseaoOythelm wfue fs. Th  t eusyg ewrlHanogrus mpuffba  s nfgvary'amwsizn,ush.  s nfgbganaheoUandeora oe-veineFrlkavel,ah lnrt"ifsids.eThoy'd spacecrthkmseld p, l.aviam rbomrfor man-siznd srnavut poto  quuszenbetwcs .a gswa"Ercmcnpufft eu isaaHl elohpecology,rtL elohpChaka srpbpi"EaedulnuaaHl elohp ifferu"v gIs'nebct ergtoeoaverlrmorerbf.wiOyyniaprobe w t eaHsebek f sEdeyni canlavoidygstt'amrbiet.n.GTh re'sIaeviciousHl elohpJoey  satylik poto lurkrin ha u,ua  owhvrs tt  Joeynedpd wrogeerdo--He u,uDad--okHenben forcm on.oofhth nsmalner t eusya  opulhecrdhegbganaheoUapartrwpSttoCelhands.aHolc'amrdheghol eopenrwpSttoCelelbows,rh.opoanFrhis sebek  top laEh"ifsids,pb lek'amrdhegopen'amrwpSttoCelbody.a gswa"Njtoubl,rthe urpbta gswaKatya hwcraebigoer t eu open.nSh.owasoreJdaddu dodgesawdy,abut--oNjtoublobig. I ca,nemr   scon.ed ogganker tlaurJoeyn.oWnoscarecrtlvmranay ae npt TtoirsniceHl elohpwal oh'oaturnnFrn.tooa mob scefeaeAbofu,uCaroos,tBig Chaka,hL elohpChaka,uJeslyca, Sylvia,aKatya ty, arJ paiarmetdhis stepfat?a 'syg imaceaw t eaHhylpless srin. Anyanivt o thiamrw wilnflepehav pound'amroOyf.et.l npt LHelohpChaka wanen.veEdigJu'amranot?a  pufft eu.aHr srpb,a"I wanegTyt  so sdy,ado wrosquuszenbetwcs otwoet eusyunless yni'vedlroanFrifsids.eW 'd bct ergdo toat  nyway gIs'nea symbiosis.iTh.owayoth at eusyspacerthkmseld p, thoy ca rforc nbig animJls n.toora oeFofhth ntt'ams  satyliveginsids.eI'vr f slu  rcarnivorhpJoey a  otwoekitosaoOyn   ubldbiroles, boSttvicious--Hey!"oHis sebek poanFra  oprobed ap if he wvrs fu"cibl,rtierern.hth ndark insidsehav puffba  .aHr retrnaveb,randraebigifly'am-saucergcrababuzzeouorte fter"him;randranot?a ;eharee, f s . Chaka wanetaptinonthemelthisly, kd ek'amreaedulffgbalance  r i ecaonongoh, anoatte birolesrwvrs furious.ISacuenly thmyyalnrveerecroffrandrawdy,adownhillpa gswaBig Chaka wanesttu'amragainstda puffba  , laitgubl. Is'nasIclearsh.odpd wrohwve th ustrengthofor bny.ed ogesre. Sylvia andrKatya werersnerkliamrbehitontsmir h'tosasanoaCldma,n wasIsucuenly n.tooa rolliamrbeoly haitg,ua  owhatodineh.  .iTh.oot?a sysrtrdug,ntwetaanoa breakpa a gswaUphillofeachthn f ibleFofhpufft eu f iesrowasoroek  topnrt"scrubby buEh"THanottiamsmwpSttthorfs. This wasIserious clpmbi o. Cldma,n w wilnh'veraus msnrtt o thrlresufifUBig Chakaoh'o wrosnrteurthemefurthcmpiButeBig Chaka waneseeibldthiams: wildfnrtehs,ia aab toonnFrbiroie diss,ooldr top Jdi o tracksaoOyscon.ed ogbka -siznd.a gswaTh y'd gonuyless tlaurtwoekilomeu.rsrn.hth nhourwsince they hef.wtl epufft eus.a gswaThirSy meu.rsrawdy,aAbofu erpb,a"Ouch!oaa gswa"What'segTyt  on?"l npt "Scon.ed ogbitome."kAbofu hbppecrts lis f.et,ta  osl ppecr?is chesrga"Th eu ofhth ndarne odiiams,rthe urpbt'"N .oa   ubl,ra biesp"ktcon.ed og satylroanFrlHanoaltinaecrabaor blbigiflea lay crusheu onsthn g oslu. A?sscolumcrawledrawdy ?lowlytl npt Caroosopicke odin crusheu ltusof rmrupro.ehav en  oOyaofTct-lo ontwig. Enbu ndofUitseinsidsieaulgeouorte satyit adherecrtnnth ntwig easiWy. Is'nasIthumbwsiznd, w t eaHsharp-hsvb'amrpaim oOyma,diblks.ISacuenly,Uitsesh.  yun oilrd,ta  ocrumpled w  onebcga,ntweblur stn aim a gswa"Whoa!" Caroosourpbt'Th.ol elohpw  onebcateso violea ly th tdthe whol etwig ?hsvb. Th  twig jerknFra  ot embWudasanoatten wasIquiet.l npt Cldma,n peerecr tdthe .ed ogmuteesarofully. "Damn,rthe urpb,a"brte satywasIfJstt"l npt "Energeebe,dtoo,okDr. Mubrtu srpbpi"Itoh oan blnr.wTHanospse ,rdoes wroit?"l npt Th.oot?a sygat?a ecr  oslu. "Wsrre dicryni fito .edn?" Cldma,n ask"d.a"Wh re wvrs yni sttu'am?"l npt Th.yynroanFrateaypaechsofsg oslurngoh Abofu's f.et,ta  of slu d imut tofUth.ol elohpsrnavut p.a gswaFeacha fet?f.etrawdy Caroososa   i,a"Orcm ?are!"oa gswaHe poanFratWHloa buEh"djat.crwpSttl ,"ugpurple,rsconwsa.wfneshy fnrtehse satyremifueoshimdofUorchids.aSercmaeaofstHaginsscv-lHanosrnavut pohova ecr  oslustHagboossomrolHanohummublbirop.a gswa"Nscva ?" Katya ask"d.aa gswa"Njpe. Scon.ed og  ubks.al npt Thoy brusheu boossomroasids,pa  ouncova ecrth ndewompos d body oOyaosrnavut rth nsiznooOyaUwoodchuek gIrouepth.crwpSttl elohpsrabp.a gswa"Jesus,okCldma,n grwfunF.'"Aruatavserth.olocal substituterfor fWies?"l npt "Bite lHanoalbiech,"kAbofu erpb a gswaSylvia tvvbgoud ha  f sEd-rpbskit.o"Le sonouep."ka gswa"Iv'nejust--oka gswa"Le sonouep,"auh  ?rpbpa gswaiYes,yma'am."kAbofu un astenecr?is rhirt a gswaSylvia swabbecrth nwoslusIclean,'havnppoureu onsperoxids.eIdofoameouap if ityw wil cateoiyralivepi"T?a e. 
toh oan cleann.nbu ndbut--Dr. Mubrtu,omay I bvtr oaynir portablk unit?"l npt LHelohpChaka nasIcarry'amwf rsboSttChakas. He shrugge roffrhisgb'ekpass a  ounzpppecrit. pulhyt  orte  metJolic boxynconrd paio  asnbig asrboSttoCelhands:eayportablk analyza . Sylvia tvvbgth ntwig feachCldma,n, teasebrth nde'oaaugroffrhav en ,pa  odebppecrid i.toodinebox.nSh.otouchnFra  oblo onbrttfu o.ehav sids,pa  oitebcga,ntwehumpkI, almomea edinebugowosil b.p laEh"burnnF, anoatte t puluspt ldyecrtoodineme dwwampsa  ouphytkecrtooClsgeald . WpSttlucklsh.owosil tten r.portrth tdthere wvrs nortoxic substa ces--a gswaBlam.a gswaTh.ominiavut runit jarrpcdn.ohyrohnlu. Seamsepoppec.a a gswaTh yabllt  mpeo. Tsrn"Big Chaka quicklyUneaned forwnrota  osniffeo. Black smoanwroserfeachhavlruineFranalyza .a gswaiDgoh Go ,rtSylvia srpbsshakily aiWhas'nasItha.walWeaboud?"l npt Th.odlvice'neshaet.relncomponufuspbarslyoslu o togstinr. Caroosourpb,a"Pganksteas?" a gswaFor blmomea ,ittn glos.pcrackl.crwpSttsenstonaa gswa"Pganksteas?" Sylvia dema,dnF, seb   shtkon aiWhas'idiotyw wil sabotagc ynir analyza ?"l npt "Calm," Caroosourpbt'"I'mesorra.oIots u,"ugi.wwaneobvious.II see tHaskDr. Mubrtu unWHletends.al npt Big Chaka nocueo nHmoturned ts Cldma,n a  ourpb,a"T.  yonoty, ariOyyniaprte  chunkoty, arsays  chunkoth nsiznooOyynirsfiblerneihoty, aroOyspse on.tooan analyza ,snhat w wil itrdu?" a gswaiBa o?"l npt "We di i to fito anot?a  of th sn diiams. Ds wrodpsturbdthosero.ehav corpses. Wegmay d .owa erdo irr gaveothem."a a gswaTh yah'oathn crusheu augro.ehav en  oOyaosebek.pJ paiarand Katya hwcrauiti a smaln,abusy fit tofUsebeksd topbivs ofsmoss. Chaka Mubrtu hyloudinebugoou forcm tteefit . 
tnelegs cur  i,aitsesh.  ypsel.cruprand--a gswaBlam.a gswaTh.osharpososlu nas an nruouap a f secracka , a  oaboud asepowHlfulp Th  t'prof'th nsebek f ewrn.toobits,ranoatteyt  mpeorb'ekgaofTctnor swoaa gswa"F euzkponobli  ,rtCldma,n srpbta gswaDr. Mubrtu spoanygravely aiExcuseron,ilosiusya  ogea lemen,rbud Iott'abgthatanyucan staun,iofficiJoWysanoafor stn t word,gthatanyuh've discova ecra?sscolumhtus-f rmronytlis planetgthatauses spse .oaa gswa"What exac ly doesgthatameaw?" Sylvia ask"d.aa gswa"I wa erdo tt'abgonyitebcfvtbHI say.rtBig Chaka nroanFrts u,"ufulp "Wr oaverblnr.wtwetalkeaboud nonb,"ugwsrn"
sgive my "eport,rthe urpbt'"Bf.wd oaI wa erdo uepehav beaverir"ka gswaClroosonroanFrts u,"ufullyo.astwnro.a"
stliak Iywb   f lnrt"thoserbuss,rthe urpbt'"Katya can s?bw mpehav beaveri anot?a  tiieaae e 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  32e 
THE BEAVERSe 
Beusyacwomplissed thi o saverbnethoy work togstinr,'alurngHdinrgdo ms .a -ELBERT HUBBARDa a gswaiSo,okClroosourpb,aclpmbi o ?teJdiWy.eDios mio--h.owasoglosafor stn t gula rfitn srosessionr wpSttCldma,n.eIdofnti ap if his musclesrwosil burEdefeeu ofhth nbones. Torvut !a"HoweareattiamsmwpSttyning Weyl to?"l npt Katya laitg i, a  ohyldraebganahoasidsdfor oerofat?a . Sh.opausec, seoptinonto ueohchafor stn trace oOyaord iWa Sh.ohyldrhyrohnlurup, a  owtiepa  i,a"Seop. Ltsten."oa gswaHe dpb,aa  ohenroshavlsoslusooOywintun.hth nt eus,randraefar-offranimJl burr.GAndoscon.ed ogesre.aa gswaAnginsscvlsoslu. A?sl ,"ugbuzzi o.a gswa"Lovb."auh  ?rpbpiAnot?a  dl'oaanimJl lay bnfvtbothem,ytlis onuypicke odohth nbone. A?c wpohrof th nweictrbus-srabpypicke oorcm tteebones. Sh.owtiepa  irn.too?a  wollar. "Clsgeald , Wr oaverblvisuJorbusssthisi o. Smalnrcarcass. Sixnor s.venrbugs."ka gswa"Ackd ol.cgedwae npt Sh.owipecr?.roforehe ?owpSttoyrobanda,na,randrneaned b'ekgagainstda t eu.aiWr  .II guess yni wererask'amraboud my nrveyhtus?"l npt "Pry'am,okClroosourpbodpstincdlya "I wanepry'amt"l npt "Yes. Weln,aIott'abgthatany'reHgstt'amralo onfine. We'vr h'oasome geauinelmomea s ters. I lHanonhat'nehapten'amt"aShr smiWudyarohyrofat?a  shrewdly aiWhy? Why'aruayni so s nssknnFraboud me? You've donetquite weceoa   dinse egohs,ia  oyni'vednercm hwcrae"eJo relJeionrhip."ka gswa"Nonuyperma,ea ,ibf.wunme eererrcmcnintense.aka gswaiBf.wd nuyperma,ea . Bobbie?"osh.oask"d.a gswaHe shrugge . "Iajustonercm gotgthatacoos oagainp Plroor psychoanalysis mi,"uasayothat 
sdo wrotliak I'meworStyp"ka gswa"A   yni tliakothat 
sshowil? Irdr.eth tdalbie oOyaod sblp stendnro?oka gswa"Yni'reHworStyp"l npt "We  ,ahmy,rtKatya urpb,a topblusheu. Sh.'oaaus mwatahi o thrlbussds me anopgnnfeachhavlcarcass. Nrt"sh.opoin  i. "Tte diss mustobegorcm tters, beyolu toatyridgea Sha   wr go lsvb?"a a gswaCldma,n fnti  ba dcomfortablk after"heebcga,ntweperspit . 
tofnti ap if stn t payw re workyt  orteof his muscles.a gswaTh y hwcrclpmbebshH," .nbu ndabovegthm f iesrotoatyh  c wilnseegorcm itsanoadug,nn.tooSha gri-La,Iseesanoafeelrstn pulseaoOyltuso  t iu. 
toremifueoshimdofUaph?aerlo onbnfvtb,nwavnohyoh'oanroanFrdug,nontAvaloa Tog,. Tha.wwanen.ehav cnlo y'srewahe days. Her aieatyninger man. A?strofgerrman. A?man w t efarsfewnrgdoubtsya  oanmes. Her aiewpSttoCelbeEdefeisfcs,iErnstdCosrn"a  oSylvia Faulkna .a gswaSh.owasopt gnaa edinn,rpt gnaa ewpSttJ paiaa Sh.oh'oastru gWudytookl.kaup. N .oadmttu'amr?a  weaknsss,ehav ty, ara gswaVcmcn"eJo  ifferu"cosnbetwcs omrn"a  owoms .a gswaHesanoaErnst.aHowmmuch hyoh'oanrd   Ernst.aA   howmmuch of thatylrve'nasIthvlsornyoOylrveyy sufeelrfor b fapStfuleanimJl?aOn.owho nercm qu   uoas,enercm rebesr,uwho f lnrts yni wpStortequ   uoa?aDr. Ernstdw t eicero.elis milu. Dr. Ernst,wonce on.oofhth n ba dbrb  iaa ehuma,s alive,Ialurn oawpStttheUmintuofUaphweld -egoh-old. If that.a gswaHowmmuch is oioxsuma,iSy measut tun.htermsooOynioxrelJeionrhips?eErcmcnman feelsimut tty, arhuma,nn.ehav p esu"ceroOyaofapStfuleanimJl. Orosl ve?a gswaGc .aHesh'ue odinsno'sou,"us. Anoahere wasIAbofu,usommuch lHanoErnstdh'oaaus . Strofga Alu ta  .aAlu brb  iaa piButeAbofu hadelis milu. Alleof his milu. a gswaWoatyh  h'oanercm "eJoly h'oa aieatfamiWy.a gswaIf there wvrs problemron.ehaattyning he ?, sr  ,afor Gc 'nesak !aTte kioa aieldly n'aetcs oegohs old. What w wil heebcgdo'amrif he wvrs onoE. sd?kI, ?is rscolumegoh of wollegu?aPerh'pnea gr'oastudea . Oremaybemh.owosil hwve ttkon amegoh or swo offrandrb'ekpasse odiebu neEurope. Orospea eamegoh on"a  .ngin a 'amoscholarshipsfu o..oofhth nenergaysrtesWdtes?a gswaMaybemh.owosil hwve luckeouortt'Th.olunoh Itlo y. Oremaybemh.owosil hwve donetshat Cldma,n ?imsIt  dpb,aa  otaanoa s mmistion. At n'aetcs oCldma,n wasIat WeEdePoin ,lprepar'amwf rslis f sEdes mmand.a gswaBf.wd  TeriesrriJo opaio  wosil hwve placedrAbofu n.ehav kintuofUsttuJ ton hm facedrontAvaloa. Her aiemaai oodecisionr thatamb,"ugweceoinflu "ceehav whol efutureeof huma,iSy,rters,ra ts usa   bb  iontmiWusnfeachhavlcr'oohrof ma,kitoa Toommuch stressa Toommuch isol  tonwITootl elohpsupp rtta gswaI.wwanelis jobytooreJnmaoud tnnAbofu.aPerh'pnei.wwan wrotooelat.ntwebeefeisfcs.aHesh' odohtry.a a gswaJ payaft.rolocal noobpJ paiarand Jeslyca f ewrbarslyothirSy meu.rsrabovegthm rev.rsanoafolnrteuritIscuth hwwnroshavlf rk gIs'nasIan olu rircm wpSttmanyxdwpstsya  oturns,abutyi.wgan fairlcrsrd this ters  r i e eceofoioxsualded meu.rsrn.hless tlaurtwclcyeklbeks.sTau CetioburnnFrbrthisly thebu nethn.ohH," cnruos,ia  oJ paiarwatahed Skeet.reh'neshau woanei.wwangorcmttkon by LHelohpChaka'necr'ft.aHr resiste odin urg.ntweturn tsmir tr'prn.tooa race:eBig Chaka waneSkeet.reIV' sapassefger,ia  oBig Chakaoh'te ospse .a gswaTh ir r'oiopcrackl.c.a"Howecoos ohwve yni aus ?rtBig Chaka ask"d.e npt "We'vr scoude  byoairseJnyxdimes,rtJeslyca anster.c.a"Have wroh' odime ts orga,iznoa tr'pronofTct. Tha.'syg ebgvecc wntry, a  ow nt addu   aygous, bncauseadin ldly way w tkd owto dl'l w t eaHg ebgvecipoto flushyit oud a  o?hsvtrit."ka gswa"Alu toatytsfcswto disrup edineecology,rtJ paiarurpbt'"Abofu does wroTHanottatp"ka gswa"Nor sh wil he,okChaka srpbpl npt "Yeah. Anywdy,atlis isaaHgeauinelAvaloa Sutprire.oWnoseem to fito a new onetercmc w ek.al npt Thoy wererapproanmi o thrlf rkowhvrs two rircmsds mbined ts become th nbig rircm toatyran scuth pahv De ?wTod  nu onstwethvlsea. Thoy turned ts f lnrt"the noru?weEdebganah, a  ojustobeyolu torlf rkoL elohpChaka snrteura   hova ecr?is rkeet.r. Thoy wererabovegaywids ebu neovaleof bluer at.r. A edinefarsdug,stream en  stn hillseo mgHdinrgsidsuoOythvlstream caonotogstinr ts f rmea nohrrts. A?eiaeeof b wila systTc rn.ehav wat.rotse u,ua  obehitontsm b wila syarmoat.crwebbi o oOyteeu tru ksd topbganaheoUf rmeuracdampiBroab,apowHlfulndark shapssdswamon.ehav laan.a gswaJ pan.ohylcr?is brea h gThis wasIscon.ed og satyth y hwc wro.venrvidsoesafor Clsgeald . LHelohpChaka nan  iaituap a sutprirewf rslis fat?a . There wasIblnr ogpause.eSkeet.reIV hova ecrldly twclcyemeu.rsror sorabovegthm  at.r. Tav wat.rosutfacear'ppled iarwad p.eAIaroab,apowHlfulnshaps glarucruprad nhuma 
tneoddly float.nnFrbody remifueosJ pan.ooOyanoaquJ tcyankyoosaurus.IBroab,apowHlfulntailastriJngula rheabp Her onWHl!  if ityh'oaf.et,tor fWippers.aOneattiam wasIcskte d:edlepiveotheosutfacea ifferu"cos. thoy wererhsvb'amra.olgvariety of grnbgve.a gswa"LHanoalbkaverrdam,rtBig Chaka f aJoly urpb,a onWHliamly.a"Iv'nebkautifulpoe npt Jeslyca a  oJ paiarexsha g.oosmiWus.a"Have yni ercm actuJoly sus monu.aDr. Mubrtu?"osh.oask"d.e npt "Yni autpkI, Kalamazoo, Minmigan,'wt re I g ewrup."ka gswa"Alu to re--okL elohpChaka srpbpi"Ds yni see?oka gswa"
ssuteddo,rscn.rtBig Chaka'siv ecuohylcrdl.kac  ternonnt, ap if he wvrs li  e"inonto a new mulycncomposi ton,tor enjoy'amwaygTc  mealp "Twoegrnbgves areapused og satylrgrn.tooplace,randranot?a  is watahi o us watah nhuma Taanousecoos reto toat epillwdy,aplease. Th.oons ononioxrthis.oke npt "Suru--al npt "AsoIots u,"u,rtBig Chaka srpbpi"NoveotheobganaheoUplacedrad nhu epillwdy:aTh y'rersrd tni o thrlwat.rotse u,ubut--d owlsvbgav'th not?a  epillwdyyarea. A  ifferu"v strucdutepoa gswaJ paiaruteerecrnhu ekeet.retwethvldug,stream en  ofttheelaanra   hova ecrabovegthm dampi"I nercm noebeed thas,rthe urpbt'"Bf.wlsvb. thoy srd tn thrlwat.roorcm tters, hvrs thvrs'nettatyserieieoftplols. RemitosaonooO--Clsgeald , nhat doesgthataremifuaonooO?oka gswa"Seohchibl--oka gswa"Sbl bnrladd.rs,"kBig Chaka srpbpa gswa"Fisseladd.rs,"kClsgeald rurpboa.oll ba dthe uronotiiea "Strucduteswto alnrt"fissedu  wimrupstream asrdamosites. Usebrexsenstvelyro.ehav No sdwAmerican cnfuinenv'on E. sd.oke npt "Clsgeald . Enlarge thoseranimJls,rtL elohpChaka srpbpe npt Jeslyca hytkecrwpSttChaka,uso toat eh  c wilngeerdhe uronovisuJop.eAIholographic wilu woopenebon.ehav miodle ofttheir wiluscrcs .a gswa"Bkautiful,"kBig Chaka repnaveba "J paywhat 
sts u,"u.oke npt There wasInogdoubt aboud it. There wererai least six shapssdtn thrlwat.r. A?scale run 'amra.otheelowHl .cgeuoOythvlscrcs rurpbo satyth y wereraboud two meu.rsrn.hlength. Two of nhumIcarried chunks oOyteeu lpmb. Two w re w.cg'amrmud i.toodinecracksaoOytheir dampiAegrnbgve's work insnercm done.a gswa"SociJo coopeeavton,"kBig Chaka brea hedp "Wr w wil wroh'veraulievcu irob'ekgtn thrlolu days,rbud Ioknew haa.wscon.ed ogTHanottinemb,"ugexist.aNrt"taanouseuprircm,randrset us dug, aboud aeklbekror sorabovegthm dam.oke npt Theotwoeskeet.rs'wt el.crnoru?wnro.a"Clsgeald ,rtJ paiarurpbt'"Sausty scan,aplease.al npt "I see d thi o iarynir area. Thoelaanrgrnbgves areas nssknnFrwpStttheir dampoka gswa"
ne'sinethrlodly dam?rtBig Chaka ask"d.e npt "NegJu've,"kClsgeald ranster.c.a"Priom toodinet went flsvdi o thrre werers.venrbetwcs oters  tontsm sea,randrI ca,nidendifyofoioxmut tupstream. ThoengoheEdedug,stream feach?hru isafifty-s.venrkilomeu.rsrtwethvlscuthweEd."ka gswa"Thankryni.oke npt "Sh wil we l to?rtJ paiarask"d.e npt "I see d eobvious da g.r,"kdinecomput.rranster.c.a"I ca,noi ansterkdinequ   uoatas ankedwae npt "Clnssl,rtJ paiarurpbt'"All rthis, iroh oan saus.aLet's durit."l npt Thoy la  Hu onsalm wf  oftroek fifty meu.rsrfeachhavlrev.r.nJeslyca wangoud f sEd,Hg ebgvecgunua.otheereJda.aBig Chakaoh'o alreJdadsh wila ecr?is b'ekpassp Herdsraad hwwnroshavlrev.r.n"I need wat.rosrmpohh."ka gswa"Aruayni sureraboud taa.?rt?is roarask"d,ranxiously.e npt "Absolut.ly.aYniydo wrotliakothat tinsnosrnavut powosil gordhebu nea   din tr sblp ts builuracdamgTHanottineif th y c wilnhunu,eds yni?"l npt "I do wrokd o.aBf.wif th y can cnopeeaveowpStteaedulu?a , nhy ca wroth y c opeeaveowpStthunueas?" J paiardema,dnF.n"Oh, sr  .rtJ paiaruwing dug,nouufofstHp pilot's seat and checanFrhis riflk.a gswa"Clsgeald . What obeervJ ton capabio gyeds ynioh've?oka gswa"SrtesWdte Foioxwb   remain iarobeervi o ra oeFfor sweld emitul s, resolutifu o..omeu.r,"kdinecomput.rranster.c.a"Tters  rnrgrnbgves tn thrlwat.rosix sualded meu.rsrdug,stream. I deu.c.wd  large landranimJls ngoh yni.oke npt "Kl.kahsvb'am."oTho rircm nroanFrpnacoful.GMaybemfifteenrkilomeu.rsrnoru?weEd, sd oc ppecrm wfue frpnaksystTc rouufwpSttstsrahyt  clar ga.GThere wasIbnot?a  ra oeFvisiblk to thrlnoru?aast,ua  obehitontsatyrang.ptoeyVylcv stretahed no sdwa  oeast for b ts usa   kilomeu.rs.a gswa"Comeron,"kBig Chaka sa   iaortt'L elohpChaka sarried aohnluhylcrscanne , a  oa riflk slu o orcm his ri,"uash wila .a gswaJ pan.ocau,"ugupfwpSttL elohpChaka.a"He lid p for stis,rdoes wrohe?" J paiarscanne odin rev.r.nHielheab ?wept ?lowlyrfeachhef.wtoxrthis. Herknew, wpStortehsvb'am,gthataJeslyca wangdo'amrthe uron.a gswaTh.orev.rbebsclay wangyellowiss,ssun-blaEdeura   crackabon.erevulets.iTh.owarpeura   dwpste od eusyalo onthe banks suggeEdeuralternetuyperiousooOyflsvdra   dr u,"u.aa gswa"What aruayni hsvb'amrfor?" L elohpChaka ask"d.e npt "Srmpohh.iTh.ousuJo,rt?is edoptedofat?a  srpb,abf.wnhure wasIscon.ed ogaboud hisiv ecuohaa.wsrpb: I'menoi reJdaddu talkeaboud iuaye..e npt "Doesgthis hwve bny.ed ogto do wpStttheUg ebgvecautopsy?" Jeslyca ask"d.a"Orkdinedlat?s?"l npt "Ercmc.ed ogontAvaloa hdoUto do wpSttgrnbgveir"kBig Chaka smiWudyfe dtly.a"Maybemon.oday thatano wroburtrue.aBf.wfor d oaty, ar"l npt Herkneltrdug,na   dsvbgap laEkgfeachlis poekes. Hersc opecra?smalnrsrmpohrof mud i.tooit.o"
ne'sinewt re Tonya waneswimmubldwavnosh.opicke oup dh.p luko?" a gswaiNo,rof worrseenoi,rtL elohpChaka srpbp "Wr do wroswimrt re.GThere  rnrgrnbgves of.wnhure!oaa gswa"Ah. Weln,ai.wwb   oaverto do,"kBig Chaka srpbpa gswaL elohpChaka nroanFrate?is rcanne .n"I "eJoly do wrowa erdo u aygters  ty lo oer tlaurnyuh've towae npt Big Chaka nocueo t gretfully. HedlroanFrdug,ntwethvlscuth. Sixnsualded meu.rsrawdy,agrnbgves wvrs opeeavtngo  t iura?sociJo conrd crp Her osil hwve ts see tHas pavnoms oa,eandrstudy ituathlength.a gswa"Maybemtomvtr o.uDad,rtL elohpChaka srpb?softly.a"Let's geerorteof hetepoa gswaBig Chaka nocueo niYes,yI mustopreparewfor my p esu"tJ ton 'sine.venibl.aka gswa"Nee ous?rtJ paiarask"d.e npt "Thankryni,abf.wmy roarwb   bemmvtbothan sufficiea ehrlp."a a gswaJ paiarand Jeslyca folnrteurthvlChakas b'ek ts Sha gri-Larand watahed themelandrsausly.aTau Cetiobeat o.ehavchhaebu nethe wilushield. Th.oairswhiptinonthebu nethe vea s seemeoutoeoaverfnrteurorcm a blaEdpfurnece f sEd.nJeslyca wipecr?.rosll.ve bcross teroforehe ?.a"PoWdte,wwan wrohe?" Jeslyca urpbt'"My roarwb   bemmvtbothan sufficiea --oksh.ogi gWud.e npt "I noebeed thas,rtJ paiarurpbt'"Imagin , hv'srembarrassecrdo saygteowa esIsconodime aloaeowpStthis roa. Sc nhat dornyudord w?"l npt "We cosil gorfito ClroosoandrKatya," Jeslyca urpb w t eamiablk malicu.e npt "Dadra   Sylviap Abofu's tak'amrdhemoup do th nlaan.okHenbanknFra  ohe ?e roffrnoru?weEd.e npt "I'meroa  ubl," Jeslyca urpbt'Sh.ouncorknFrawnhurmosoandrgulped wat.r,'havnpha  Hu i forcm totJ paiaal npt Herdgank gr'tofully. Ercnsthrlwat.ro aiewarm.a"Pretty fierwe,rthe urpbta gswaShrlnodlrd,ta  olroanFrb'ek dug, atdthe terrainrbenrt"them gIs'nasIbrokon by roek  topt eus,r?lotinonup downroshavlm wfue fseseb   do th nweEd.e npt "Yni kd oanhat w  c wilndo?"osh.oask"d.ISacuenly,Uterov ecuosparkl.c.aa gswa"What?" a gswaiLet's gontwethvlswimmubldhol efor b dip."ka gswa"If nyucan fito it."kHe thou,"ugfor blmomea .a"Clsgeald , dicrw nteceoyni t  labvecaty place ngoh Sha gri-Larap a swimmubldhol ?"l npt "Y p.eAImeau wotn thrlwoousoel.venrkilomeu.rsrnoru?weEdeoOyynirsp esu"t posi ton isadesiga'te o'Th.oOld'SwimmubldHol .' "eAIrelncirclse ppeareu onsthvlskeet.r'iemap display.e npt "That's it.oScan the  rna--al npt "Donu,"kClsgeald rurpb. "Nonda oers deu.c.ed. Th.oarna isadesiga'te osausgfeachgrnbgveiraYniyarewremifueosdo scan the meau wobnfvtbolandibl.aka gswa"Yeah,syeah,rtJ paiarurpbta gswaTh.omeau wonasIan ovaleansualded meu.rsrbcnuixga.GA?sluggissestream ran thebu neit. dl.kaap a shoemtop, a  otn thrlexac  went.ro aieancircula rponcrts omru.rsrn.hdiamru.rta gswaTh.y f ewr  oslustHagperimeu.rxofhth n eau w.a"Njtoublwnhure,rtJ paiarurpbt'"Clsgeald , yni agrus?" a gswaiAffirmJu've."l npt Herdebppecrthvlskeet.r ontwethvltt'ck gr'ssraboud twclcyemeu.rsrfeachhavlpolu toaty aiealnrthatgremaineFrofttheelaanrfeachwhich tteomeau wof rmeu.aTh.omeau wogr'ssr aieaboud kneeohH,",Ialurn trrcmcntt'ck.aa gswa"Race yni!oaa gswa"LaEdpoaeoin isaaHrjat.noScriberaulch!oa gswaJ paiarreJnmecrthvlhol eodly two stepsaaheab oftJeslyca, bud hisimomea um, bnlly-fnrppecr?im i.toodinewat.r. l npt Herglarucrdug, atdthe driptinonmucklo, ?is rhirt a gswa"Yerch,"khe urpbt Jeslyca sosil hwrdly iesrrainrhursIt ,Ialurf aJoly wollapsecrdo th nshors, holc'amr?.rosidsiea  obelnrtt o wpSttlaitgder.e npt "Yni sh wil ty, arsec ynirsIt ,oksh.ogasprd,truc-faced.aa gswa"Hatthah,rthe urpbta gswaHeebcga,ntweshuek ?imsIt  ouufofstHp cllu?as. Wring his rhirt oud a  otossecritrupro.twethvldmcng oslu. FolnrteurwpStthis rhorts.i"Tlis isasrea ,rthe sa   iaortutoeoe .n"Comeron i.wae npt Sh.o?asitJeecrfor blmomea ,aa  oths rurpboa silernynhat-ths-heln,aandrshuckeouhursIt rorteof het cllu?asra   dovegiaal npt J pan.ohur  i a shoe,'havnpbnot?a ,'havnphis b'   i-uprunWHlwear. Necuogroupi o.a gswaJeslyca uwamowpSttpowHlfulnstrokoh.iTh.ohol e aieldly ts omru.rsrbcross, two meu.rsrdl.kaataitsedl.kesrgaThrlwat.ro aiecryu alIclear, ri,"uadug,ntwethvlroeky fnror.oNoenaEdy sutprires lurkecrin toeUdarkn sr.a gswaWpSttan unsomfortablk bie oOysIt -awdrnbess J pan.onoted thasaJeslyca's strokoh wereractuJoly mvtbomasculinbothan his.aHestsfcecrdo bemmvtboflupb,aal ba del.gaa piAbofu hadeboSttquoo gi.sasanoai.wwango..oofhth nttiamsm satyleteoiyrswimrri oiearoslu--a gswaDammut,rh.orofusecrdo letnttiamsmgeerwomplicaveba Ri,"uad owltusowasIgTc gaThrlskyrwasIrcmcnblue,aa  oths cnruos eererrcmcnwhite. Th.odwpste od eusyframeouth nswimmubldhol ebkautifully.a"Race yni,"auh  ?rpbpi"Tenrlaph."ka gswaHessthieb,abf.wgriet.Frhis tepth. Allerthis. HerwasI aster onsthvlla  ,ibf.wuwimmubldwaieantoss-upal npt J pan.obvtbodug,,pb anknFrtinembn ,pa  obcga,ntweclkaveodinewat.r. In thrleffort,rin toeUstru gWu, boSttof nhumIforgotgercmcsoublabf.wnhuleffort,ranoai.wwangarglorious dayt Jeslyca sli oup nextutoeoimon.ehav wat.r,'andrshove  i a wad  i.toolis facu.aHr splaEhnFrb'ek,ehav race wompletelyrforgotts .a gswaFor stn momea ,aboSttof nhumIeererwompletelyrc  tern.a a gswaTh yauwamodwpcemmvtb,'andronsthvllapayattsmpt,rh.obeat ha . Sh.ogasprdrfor o..omvtborace,randrh ndewlinbd. HerwasIwompletelyrdrainbd. His brea h saonon.esrea  sobbi o gulps,rbud hvldmagge r?imsIt  upro.twealroek,ta  olroanFrdug, atdha .a gswaSh.olroanFruprad ?im,ta  olaitg i, a  osucuenly scon.ed oginrhur eyes sha g.oa "J pain,"auh  ?rpbpi"Lsvbgav'yourwside."l npt Scon.ed ogdiss  i againstdhis ribsm satylroanFrlHanoalm'ssroftplapaic blTc gaIs'nasIpaWu, ll ba dtransparea ,ibf.wwaneshotgthebu newpSttveiny strucdutep.eAsgteowatahed,ehav veins pulseFra  oengorgeurwpSttblTc ga gswa"Jesus,oktn moanHd. "Mut tofUth.se jnllyfissedtiams?" a gswaShs cnpmbebsouufofstHp wat.r. "Seop womplainifga Ai least th y'rernr.wtwxic. Thoy justowa eraHl elohpblTc gaYni'reHbeibldchildissea  otnhoepivablkwae npt "Hatthah. Why'do wroyni come uprters  tonhrlpponobua.venrmvtbotnhoepivablkeseb  ?" a gswaiAv'yourwservicp,"auh  ?rpb, a  ocnpmbebsupal npt Th.oleech-ttiamsmeererfairlcrhwrmlsss,ehransparea ,inr.wmuch tt'cker tlaurlkavel. Thoy ldly becaonovisiblk wavnoengorgeurwpSttblTc g Maty ofstHp rircmsda  olakoh h'oathnm--in fac ,ittn endirerwofuinenv'wasIgenerously supplieurwpSttparasites--bf.wd nuyh'oatransmiet.Fraty amoeboidsror ot?a  bacd!ria. Thoy justostoohpblTc ga gswaJeslyca went for oerob'ekpass,oopenebon ,aa  otvvbgoud  rurltshtko . Sh.osprinkl.crurltronsthvlleechal npt Th.re wasInogpain,ua  oJ pan.oh' odime ts lsvbgav'ha . Dammut,rh.owissnFrtinembn yw wil seop ttatp Sconhow,ai.wjustoseemeouap if her facuoh' osha g.o,tor ap if he hwc wro.vem "eJoly nroanFrate?erobnfvtb.a gswaSh.otuckeouhur kneesrup, a  owr ppecr?cm armso  oslustHam.a gswa"Nrt"we waiugfor blmitul ,"auh  ?rpbpa gswaTh yah'oaaus mcoos oTHanottinemJnyxdimes bnfvtb,nercm since childhTc g Nud gyewasIno.ed ogdiwtor unusuJo for stem gBf.wd oaty, aa gswaNrt"the curveyof het b'ek,ehav shaps of het smiWu,a.venrhav dampbess of het hairsseemeousootnvi ubl,usooty, aa gswaBnfvtbohe knew exac ly nhat he wasIdo'am,rh.oneaned ov.rsanoakissecrha . Huohylcriugfor blmomea .aHur eyes went rcmcnwids,pa  otavnosh.odrewrbaek,estsrahed.aa gswaHur eyes nohrrtedp "Woaty aie satyfor?" a gswa"Justoa passublwnh u,"u.oa gswa"Uh-huh."kHe c wil wroteln,abut he ts u,"ugttatyhet ecuth,gthatatanne ,apouvtngoecuth,gh' osur  i i.toodinesl ,"ueEdeoOysmiWus.l npt Th.osilerc nbetwcs othumIg ewrstrainbd. J pan.'elbodygh' osercmaeamap-shapsdIrelnsplotaheoUwhvrs tt  parasitesyh'oaf'   nranay  Afuisepaic waneswabbecroa,eandrheofnti fine d o.aBf.wsconhow,angHdinrgof nhumIh'oarememberecrtnnpf.wnhuit cllu?asrback o .a gswa"Yni di i to taanobct ergsaroeoOyynirsIt ,okJeslyca urpbt'Sh.oran her fi g.ryalo onthe horreshoemridgerof musclelo, ?is upper arm,pa  otavn, ap if aosucuen ts u,"ugh'oan.terrup eouth nf sEd,Hsh.oneaned baek,ea  oturned anay l npt J pan.oneaned forwnro,sanoakissecrha ash wila . Th.n?softly,rh.orubbnFrtineaheekgagainstdit.oA day's stubbl.ogavegaygealpapsmcn.cgeutoodinemottonaa gswaTavnohyokissecrituagain,ua  opulhecrbaekaa gswaTavir eyes met,ta  oi.wwango..oofhthos omomea s whvrs tt  reEdeoOytt  worl odebpsrawdy i.toono.ed o, whvrs tt  reEdeoOytt  sthissda  ososlusoa  osm.  s nfgtt  unircms  stmply vaniss. Th.re wasIno.ed oginrtt  endirerworl obut her eyes,pa  otavnoher lips,pa  otavefeess,ssrltyxdaste of het ecuth,gandrher h'tosowtiepa -soft upo, ?is rh wila saa gswaIs'nasIa vortex. Innocea ,aa  olthis,ibf.whypnoebe. Th.okiss laEdeurfor perh'pn twclcyesscolus;otavnosh.opulhecrbaek,pa  otavre wasIscon.ed oginrhur eyes ttatyhe h'oanercm sus mi othumIbnfvtb. Yearni o, perh'pn.oA  oswc essa Sh.oneaned forwnrota  okissecrhimobaek,esoftly,ra  otavnomut turgea ly.l npt Th.oheatowasIjustobegin 'amrtoegr oanhvnosh.oplacedrher h'tos,UteropaWmsoflatyagainstdhis chesr;ua  opussnFrtimnf smly anay l npt Sh.onaitg i, a  ostTc ,otossecrhet hair, a  oran i.toodinewoousaa gswaIs'nasIa ch'   ngs  r oldr sxdime,  r oldr sxdineman-woman thublwnhat drovega   ouma,nltusgaIs'nas wroa race. Is'nasIthe race. A  otavegra  opriznonasIty, aa gswaHet  mpeoroffrhisgseat and ran,alaitgubl, i.toodinewoous,ehav tang  i,aknjat.crvine-hubldwoousonhat g ewravre onsthvlfarssidsuoOythvlm wfue fs,eandrheosaw ttatyhe c wilncatah ha . There wvrs tteeu "eJsons--on , hv'nasIa l elohp aster,rexsept orcm nrblddpsta ces. Secolu, shr oacrts breakehav td iWa Allehr oacrts dornasI olnrt.l npt Thiro,sanoa ba dtmportaa ly--sheowa enFrtimnto wpn. l npt Hernrsd sthis of het for blmomea sano--a gswaThere sheowas,ejustoaheab ofttim.aSh.oturned het hl'oaa oslusts see ?im,tgavegayl elohpsqueak,sanoaty, aa gswaCollicecrw t eaHspila edlviheneEd.e e 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  33e 
LOVE AND FEARe 
Dlat?,rin itsIt ,IisIno.ed o;ibf.wweofear 
To bemw tkd owd .owhas,mw tkd owd .owhetb.a -JOHN DRYDEN, Aureng-Zebea a gswaTh yah'oacrosseouth nridgera  owere b'ekgtn thrlf iesrgaSylvia steppecrortutoepasshCldma,n, who nasItak'amra l elohpextd odime ts study hav tdeusya  ohav pat?s. Sh.owatahed Abofu sarofully. He wasIsc ta  , soewOceoformeu.aHis musclesrsli osmoo.elygunWHlrhis tanne osk'a,eandrheomnd   wpSttsuch colfidence. Al ba dTHanosome kintuofUmanmi e,randrh t hl'rtrwenv'oututoeoima Sh.oh'oanercm aus mblmotavrutoeoim,oh'oanercm offeruFrtimnaty ofstHp somfortr thatamb,"ugoavermos.phis ltusoeasier.GAndoshe egohned ts dorscon.ed ogty, ara y.ed ogty, arts bridgertHp shasmnbetwcs othum.a gswa"Sooty, aoyni come uprters ofts ?rtsh.oask"dalam. y. uutprired thasashv'nasIablk to getgthatamuch outnbetwcs olabvtbd brea hsaa gswaHetsmiWudydug, atdha .a"
st addu getgup n.toodinehillse r ofts e r postiblk,"khe urpbt "Itogid p me aosha ck to feelriaruynahowpStttheUl to."ka gswa"ThisIty, aIisI"eJoly nhat yni wa enFra   alo o."ka gswaHesnocueo nA smaln,awarmtsmiWuosrnasnFrtinelips.o"
n wroit nhat yni wa enF? Alleof yni?"l npt "I supp s  sot"aShr wal ed alo onwpStthim for b time,  onWHliam hot?toIaroach tteoonetqu   uoatthataburnnFrn. het eitoa "Abofu ty, aoyni andrIgoavernercm hwcrmuch time ts talk.oa gswa"A?c wpohrof  onWHlfulndinne r th u,","khe naitg i.a"I ca,eseb   rememberythvlmenu. C rn brea ,oturnip grus s,lpr?aerribwae npt Sh.oknew haa.wshe h'oan.vienFrtimnto dinehousu,ubut for ste ltusoof het she c wil wrorememberynhat h'oabcs rurpb,tor eaten,tor done. And thasawaieanterriblk p ga.GHur child,ibf.wuh  c wil wroburwompletelyrcskte doof aty subllean.terac tonwIShe wasIstruck byoa wad  of remoms  sotpowHlfulniuash ckeouhur.a gswa"Di oi.wty, aobotavruyni?"tsh.oask"d. "Thatoyni nercm hwcrparea s?"l npt He naitg i.a"What aruayni talk'amraboud?aThrlwhol eItlo y wasImytfamiWy,oremember?"l npt Th.onextuqu   uoatwasIunspoann.eDid yni ercm  onWHl who ynirsparea sowere?aIf gHdinrgoraboSttof nhumIeereravre onsAvaloa?eDid yni orcmlsvbgn.toodinefaces ofsdineE. sd B rn, a  owonWHl ifgo..oofhusr aieTh.oOne?eDid yni ercm lsvbgav'me anopwonWHl,aAbofu?eDid yni ercm c adat n',"ugbncausead eoaeow wilntaanodinef aJo reEpo,tibio gyefor yni?oNoeoaeow wilngive dinef aJo damn?a gswaBf.wuh  c wil wroaEkgthos oqu   uoas. N .oye..GMaybemlat.r. Lat.r,'nhvnosh.oh'oathn opp rtu,iSy du getghimobyr?imsIt . Lat.r,'nhvnomaybemth y c wilnboSttgetgaHl elohp ru k. Thatamb,"ugbemth  beEdech ecuoaft.roa  .aItamb,"ugbemth  ldly ch ecu.a a gswaTh re wvrs mut tbussdhetb.a gswaCldma,n adjustnFrtinebinocula s,eandrwatahed asIa cnruouofhAvaloa insscvs f.dronsthvlcorpseeoOysome kintuofUmarsupialp "What ds ynio.ed k?"khe ask"daAbofu.a"Di oth  beusyatt'ekgtt?"l npt "We'vednercm sus matt'ekgbeoaviom feachAvaloa buss,rtAbofu erpb irr gably.a"Scavenging,syes,ea nr.wof that. Iyw wilnbet ynio.eat poom c it erg eceoouufofstHp teeu andrbrokoaitseneck. Th.obodygbcga,ntwedewompos ,pa  otaveswent attrac e oth  beus. 
sdo wrotliak thoserare kilners.al npt Thorv'nasIa ?teJdy?eiaeeof beusyarr ving,sea ubl,ucircld oginraHl elohplazy pat er, abuzznwpSttot?a  beusy(aneif th y eereraaviam aHl elohps mmu,iSy hoe-dug,,pCldma,n ts u,"u),'havnpheJdi o back offrn.toodinedpsta ce.a gswa"Clsgeald , noveotheod sectifu ofoth  beu td velpoe npt "Noved. C mbined wpSttdata supplieurby Caroosoi.wisInow "eJsonablk to s nsludsehaa.wnhuldiss isIsconodweld ekilomeu.rsrtweynirsnoru?aast."ka gswa"Probabio gy?" Cldma,n ask"dcautomJu'sa  y.aa gswa"Numerical    umetuytmpostiblkpoe npt "That's i.tere  ubl," Cldma,n srpbta"Ynirg uzzy-logic program usecrdo give numerical    umetus. What hapteneo?oka gswa"My exac bess c it!riaIeererwha g.oaoka gswa"Oh? By nhom?oka gswa"
sdord ttkd o,"kClsgeald rurpb.a gswa"Edgar," Cldma,n muet.relta"O..oofhth s.odays I'ceokb   oim,osoeoelppon--Yni srpb data supplieurby Caroos.GHu'sI oslusbeusytou?" a gswaiAffirmJu've."aa gswa"H wofa  is ttinelaanrd w?" Cldma,n ask"d.a gswaAbofu erpb,a"Maybembnot?a  h s . Mba ly nercl feach?hru.oa gswa"Andydug,hillos mi o back," Cldma,n srpbta"Okay gI w wil wrowa erdo mist Chaka'silecdutep I--tliak i.wmay bndtmportaa p"l npt "What aboud ta  beus?" Sylvia ask"d.a"Chaka seemeouvcmcnintereEdeuri othump"l npt Cldma,n nocueo niHe suteddpbtaBut th y'ceokl.kauneb  tomvtr o.uHure, di i aohnluoorcm ttat roek?oka gswa"Yos. thankryni.gIs'nestra g.,"auh  ?rpbpi"It'neharcrts bulievc hs'nett  ?ronoboy yniousecrdo taanofu G ebgvecScouuforcmn',"uers.aEb,"ugegohs old?oNine?oka gswa"Wten what?" a gswaiTh.ouwimmubldwompeti tonwIRememberythat?"l npt "Whorv'J pan.onewahe dr oneo?oe npt Sh.onocueo het hl'o niHe alwdysopussnFrtimsIt  soeonrotagainstdAbofu.oe npt "No di i for oimnto do toat," Cldma,n srpbta"J pan.oinelis ug, boy.oe npt "Bututoebnoalm'nohyoh'oatoebnolHanohis fat?a . Andyyni wvrs tt  coos styhe c wilncomep"l npt Cldma,n knew haa.wshe wasIgett'amra.wscon.ed ogbf.wwan wroquite cskte donhat i.wwan.a"So?"l npt "Scwty, aoh.owatahed tHp two of ynio.ogstinr. Yni andrAbofu.aJustolHanoIgoave. Anoahe seesywhat 
suep."ka gswa"Anoanhat isythat?"l npt "Thatoyni andrAbofueareatwo of nhu ?ronotype. J pan.owa esIyni t  lovegoima Abofuewa esItoebnoyni.gWhich of nhumIeb   reJoly gev'yourwlove?gWhich eb   gev'yourwreEpecd? Anoanhich of nhosn diiamsyw wilnaoboy rat?a  h've?oka gswaCldma,n brusheu a solumu ofobganaheoUorteof hisyw ma,'s facu.a"Aruayni sayublwnhat Iyw wilnrat?a  h'veoh'oaAbofueasIa ?oatthabpJ paia?oe npt "No gI w wil wrop esume ts say thattaBut maybemJ pan.otliakr thatayni w wilnrat?a  h'veoh'oaAbofuethan him.GAndoscon.imes, that'iealnrit taans.al npt Wasoi.wtrue? Wasothorv'a place   t iurCldma,n tsarop eferrpcdAbofueasIanohyir? Ercnsd w? Mvtbothan J pan.oor ty, aa gswaOr Minkey?aHis ug, fnesh andrblTc g Gc .aHesnercm spea etime wpStttheUboy.GAndonow Minkey spea e ba dof hisytime up n.ttheUmtni o wampswhvrs Big Chaka dicrbiology andrSt.vensr aierebuilui onthe mtni o equipmea .aBnfvtboLinta'sidlat?,rthe lapaytime Minkey h'oacconodug,nofelis ug, acworoa aieto watah St.vensrgeerwreameurby Abofu n.ehav debate.aa gswaGrea .a gswaCldma,n Weyl to, Fat?a  of nhu Yearaa gswaIs'nasIprobably tooelat.ntwedora y.ed ogaboud taa..aHowmmuch ofstHp sompeti tonnbetwcs oJ paiarand Abofuewasohis fault?a gswaHeodpd wrokd o.aHe "eJoly dpd wra Allettatyhe c wilndornasIdo t addu hl'l tHp rift,rifyhe c wil.gWhileyhe c wil.gAlusts ttatyhe pl.cgedr?imsIt .a a gswaSylvia watahed Abofu. He wasIsc strofg,osoeoandscon,osoevcmcnmuch aoneada . There wasIsc much i.ehav way ttatyhe uwing his arms,Isc much i.ehav way he sa   iab'ek ts them,ytlatoremifueosha  of Cldma,n.eWhoercm ttinemJn Koskov,rthe on.owho conrdibude  hat rof Abofu's geneaic meturiJo, h'oabcs , shr knew instincdtvelyrhaa.wshe wosil hwve lHandr?im l npt Sh.oalnrteurhursIt rblmomea arytfaa asy. What mb,"ugiugoaverbcs rTHanoto acwep edinefat?a 's geneaic meturiJo n.ttheUmuteesonvea tonJo fashifu ty, ao?a gswaBf.wthere wasItheUvcmcn"eJo postibio gyeof damage,'haiamsywro onwpSttAbofuetha.wuh  c wil wrouep, sinkbesses ofsdinespitiugbenea h bny.ed ogtha.wuh  c wilrreJnm.gAlusif that wasItrub,nwaoserfault wasIthat?aa gswaNoeoae'saa gswaSc strofg,osoemuch aoneada ,osoeoandscon,oand postibly damaged. What kintuofUmot?a  w wil shegoaverbcs ? A?er.wof painrbubbl.dgupfwpStthaa.wnh u,"u.aPain,ua  o'sou,"usUvcmcn ifferu"v feachhavlintellecdualejustificavionr th.y fedteaedulu?a  aboud ta  child eb. Sh.oshosil hwve nurvut Frtimnn. het body.aLetthim feelrherwlove,Uterofear, herwlongingl. Thoserare tHp rhy.emsooOyouma,nltusgaThopextdemeUmoob ?wiamsyofUmot?a s--in a sens ,pdpd wroth.y rd tn thrlchild eb?aHormonJo s mmu,icavionr, sayubl:aThis isaltus,Imytchild. Thoseremottons,ehav hH,"sya  ohav lrts. Drinkedl.kly oOyalleof iugbf.wd rmoat.ronhat i.wir thatayni feel, n.ttheUmtda dof i.wty, aothere isalove,Uthere isattineto alIacwep a ck   t iurmytbody.a gswaThoserexperiu"cosnAbofu hadebcs rdeni"d.a gswaA  ohais wasIscon.ed og satyshr oacrts lid fwpSttd o.aBf.wperh'pn,ejustoperh'pn,ethere wasIseb   dime ts dorscon.ed ogaboud it. Alusif there was,wshe wosil.a a gswa"It'netHp richbess of ituall," Cldma,n srpbta"Ercmc.ed ogdepsfcswfu ercmcsoublaesre.aBig Chaka shrteuronodwelcyeparasitesya  osymbiotesyl ving n.tjustodinespila edlvihh."ka gswa"Samloa too.rtAbofu emiWudta"Ercmc ?roloa is a solo y.oa gswa"Andythoserhorrema,v tdeusyarerlHanoalworl ou.toodinmsItves. Hel-lo!oa gswaThosn dieeu treusystTc rlHanoninter-naanFrbeechel. ThoirseJnesylay brokon, n.ttheeu parallel?eiael. Thoy mustooaverf'   nranay n.t nuypiecu andrbroko,nontimp crp New mJnesywvrs gr oubl,unr.wmuch mvtbothan grus pfur.a gswaA  oAbofuewasolaitgubl.a"Avaloa Sutprire! Funny,Iis wroit, hot?itualwdysomakoh sens oaft.royni kd o. What haptens is,ohais bri i debpsritseendirerma,v ercmc ?o ofts .aIs'kl.ks dug, dineparasites. Th.n?it's gotutoesurvid fwhileyit gr os a new mJne,osoeitostot poa nr.wof sugar. We'vedbcs othinkeni o thrlsaprby vacuum erapor  tonwIYni'ceohwve ts t.  yon,pCldma,n,aSylvia;oyni'vedtaEdeurmapohrsyrup."ka gswa"Itano wroburthu ?ron. N .omos.pthat way,rtSylvia srpb.a"If yni do wrocarameliznomapohrsugar,rit tastesyl khrsugar  at.r. Tav flavom comes feach?at -charr ng nt."ka gswaCldma,n ?adebcs rhsvb'amraboud himowpSttnew eyes.i"Tlorv'arv'a nr.wof thore.aO..oorteof foioxtreusyis gr oubl a new mJne. Why'dpd wroI see itebcfvtb? Why'aruath yablltdo'amrit?"l npt "Chaka srpb?hH,"Hl insol  ton,rtAbofu erpb. "Mut tsunl ,"ugmeawsimut tsugar meawsimut tsongressrbugs andrJoeys andrercmcsoublaesrepthat lid p in a horrema,v. Whs othuxtreu'nesupp rti o toommaty squJ uers,ai.wjustopussnnetHp housuforcmp"l npt "We getgto thore roeks,yI wa erdo u op. I'vedgotua pebbl.oiurmytshoe,rtSylvia srpb.a gswaCldma,n nroanFrate?eroblmomea .a"I'ceojustomnd nontahl'o nAbofu,uI w wil wrodo toatriarutrang.pterritotyp"ka gswaAbofu sau,"ugttndtmplicavion. "We'vedbcs rdumtinonspse on. ttinelaanronce aIeeek for ste past six mont?s. It does wrodrain,uCldma,n.eTlorv'arv wroanyagrnbgves ?hru. I wanehotinonw.'oafito yni ou  bea ,'haou,".aka gswa"Yni mea toned thasaat breakfast."l npt "There wasIscon.ed ogTHanoalbkarravre two egohs ago,'nhvnoweodpd ste prelimifara.GTheeu sualded kilos, iroh oae rlHan.aPostibly an overgr onrJoey.oWnoca wrofito hidsunot hairsof itud o.oka gswa"Maybemiugoibernetus?"ka gswa"Itais wroninter.oka gswa"Esebvatos. tho.wae npt Sylvia stbppecrto adjust het boo .aHur eyes on.uCldma,n'elbriufly. He smiWudyanoanal ed ontahl'o,rlkavd og?a  wpSttAbofu.oA dozs otimes, n. two dozs o ifferu"v ways,rSylvia al ba dask"daAbofu ste cruciJo qu   uoa. Dooyni kd o thatayni aruamy roa? Dooyni saro? Wosil itebcygTc  for oimnto kd w? Di oi.wmoat.r?a gswaA  obncauseadinre wasInora sterkdonaty ofs?a  qu   uoas,esheowa enFrdonengage his intereEd, tinembn wIShe wa enFrdonkd oanhoodineyning ma,nwasIbehitontsm perf.c.wphysique,ehav handscon facu,ehav pierwublaeyus.l npt "Woaty aieitolHanofor yni?"khe f aJoly urpb,abreaki o thrlsilerc .a"Iu ste rcmc ewahe days?"kHe stbppec,pa  otavnosmiWudyal ba dshyly.a"No gThat'ienoi reJlly hav qu   uoatI wa enFrdonask.oka gswa"What is?"l npt "Thv qu   uoatI "eJoly na enFrdonasky aiewhy'dpdoyni "eJoly come tombnot?a  stsr?oka gswa"
sdo wrounWHlstend.al npt "I kd o th.oofficialIa sters:rexplor  ton,padvea utedty, aobf.wwhy yni?oWhy'ttineparticula radvea ute? Alleof yni. Alleof th.oE. sd B rn oaverblsoneervJ tveestreakanhich w wil seem to burwompletelyr ifferu"v feachhavlhoigh-horadvea uterr thatacaonoout hernoorig aJoly. Sc ty, aonhat'nehavl"eJo truth?oe npt Sh.onasIa l elohpstsrahedrby hav qu   uoa,ibf.wsau,"ugttndmeawd ogbehitoni.oll ba dimmediat.ly.a gswaThoaddul otavmsItves haa.wnh y came tomcap uteda  otame aonew worl . Seelohrsyh'oaalwdysodl'lt wpSttsuch emottons--a  odl'lt wpSttlosses such asItheUE. sd B rn oa osustainbd.a gswaThoaddul otavmsItves haa.wnh y g ewrmut tsoneervJ tve,mmvtbofewafulnbncauseadiny'dpd wrokd o if atyoaeow wilnercm come tomjoi othum feachE. sd. Or,rinWHec,pifIscon.ed ogoa ohapteneo ontE. sd,Iscon.ed og erriblk,anhich presludsd atyoaeoesrepfeach olnrti o thrmnto dinestsrs.aa gswaBut maybemty, aa gswa"Yni'reHquies,rthe urpbtl npt "I nasIjustodiinb'am. ThatanasIa gTc  qu   uoa. I guess ifIIrnasIdo a sterkfor mysIt --a  oI cskte dly ca wroa sterkfor atyoaeoesre--I'dohwve ts sayothat 
shwcrmy susban ,pa  ohr oacraodream. I sharecrnhu dream. Maybemnoi asemuch asgteodpbt"l npt "What dpdoyni oos os mi o oud?"khe ask"d.ka gswa"
sh'oaf'miWy. Feisfcs."ka gswa"Anoasaroer?"l npt "No!hAvaloa fitsemytcaroernfine. But Iott'abgfu econodl.kahercl Idgotupulhecrorteof mytacos.micsrbcnmy susban ."ka gswa"Anoatavnoyni me.uCldma,n?rtAbofu emiWudta gswa"Abonrotrhip. Yni kd o a nr.waboud taos oewahe days,"auh  ?rpbpa gswa"Tlorv'arv'a nr.wof diarieiea  ojournelseo mpublicl"eworo. Intere  ublpb anknspots tn thrm,ytoo. A?er.wof publiclvidso. Is'nasIeasaddu  ee tHas yourwattrac uoattoaCldma,n bcga,nwhileyyni wvrs seb   marriedwae npt Sh.osthieb niHe nasIdasgubl.aA  oI tliak that 
'oanercm me.uatyoaeoquite lHanohim.aA  oI ty, aoguess that i.wnasIa l elohpovernhvlmubl.aAonew worl ,owpSttnew sthissda  osm.  s.oI tliak that there isaaepart oOya woman tharowa esrts line up behitonorabesidsudinestrofgeEd, wild stymale uh  can fito,pa  oh'veohis child eb."ka gswa"But yni dil wrodo a y.ed ogaboud taa.?" a gswaiNotauneb  aft.roTerry'dpec,pno."ka gswa"But yni ts u,"ugaboud it.ae npt Sh.ooacrts grpn. iYes,yI ts u,"ugaboud it.aNrt"that'ne.nbu ndqu   uoas,edarn nt."kSeop prying n.ts Mot?a 'elbusibess ty, aoe npt His smiWuowasIsecre tveebf.wwarm,pa  oherbrokoadinetd iWoaheab oftthrmnsteprbcnutep, herw?oatmaki o thrlnay for ste mot?a  heodpd wrokd o.a a gswaIs'nasInhat m wfue fehrsysa   iaa "ha gd ogTaan"otuckeouo.tweall.cge. Tav g oslur?lot.dgupfuteekly ou ste scuth anoanest sides,uso toat lo onshau wsg eceoouetha.wuidsuoOythvlwat.ro eceobnfvtboi.wn wilnberdusk  tywhvrs esre.aNrt"thos oTo onshau wsgstretahed bcross thvlTaan,osrnavubl a fasrepevenibl.aCldma,n bclievcu ttatyhe sosil hkarrhavlhumuoOynewaby beus,ibf.wsosil d  lo oer  ee tHem ge npt His wam specs wvrs ou stermaeamodn.a gswaTh.oshau wsgwenv'orang.. Th.odreusysur oslui o thrllaanrfloadeuri oa ghba ly haze.GThere wasol elohpthere thatacosil hwve bcs ruus mi oaroab daylthis. Th.oendirermTc  wasoquies,ysa m l npt Aosucuen mnd mea sbehitontsm stenduoOytreusycap uteFrtineoat.n ton instaa ly. What havlheceoty, ao?a gswaA smaln,abusahyt  shaps  mergeurfeachhavlbrush nA snbut.r,'o..oofhth npig-THanottiamsys mmou n.ehav lowlalusoa  o"eJsonably pl.n tfulnou ste hH," plat.aus. It saw Cldma,n twclcyemeu.rsrawdy,asqueak i, a  ostsraad hwoturnaa gswaIn a sucuen bluryofUmotifu econ.ed og ut touufofstHp woousoa  oslammedrn.toodinesnbut.ruso fast thatyhe dpd wrohwve time ts tliak. He watahed,efaswubadeu,r sxdinemoastem ttat oa osucuenly  mergeurd isecritelheab,pb ew flam.srn.toodinen',"ugairta gswaTh. back ofuCldma,n'elneckgwenv'coldr nbsclammy.aa gswaAegrnbgveta gswaGc .aWoaty aieitodo'amrhere?a gswaWeln,ai.t nuynay n.wnasIa stupi  qu   uoa. Augttndmomea ,an.wnasIfea  ubl.aCldma,n sh wila ecr?is riflk,oand prepared hwofire. Tav g ebgvecstbppec.aa gswaAn olroanFrupal npt D sectlyrad ?im.uCldma,n'elfi g.rynasIo othuxtrigga . Huofnti thuxtenstonsof it,ofnti thuxtrigga 'sabreaki o poin ,lknew haa.wbnot?a  gram of pressutedw wil setontsm bolufofselecdricldlat?nonti soway.l npt Th.ogrnbgve's eyes.iTh yauaw him.aA  ofor ste f sEd,Hste rcmc f sEd time ercm he dpd wrofeelrsmptibess t?hru. I.wwan wrodea h bn odlstrucdionaa gswaIs'nasIty, aoecon.ed ogesre.aScon.ed og.venrmvtbodpsturbi oaa gswaHe waideurfor tav g ebgvectweatt'ek. Why? Wasoav g ving ntua sha ck? Wasotha dTHanosome bulhsgutaWes er, gunf',"uerosrndo,rscme smaln-t onrmarshalnrin a ba oB mndie?aIt'neyoioxmuve,mRingooty, aa gswaHeodpd wrokd owwhy,abut he justoc wil wrobliam himsIt  toupulhotha ddamned hrigga . There sm stTc ,ofaci o thisattinonwpStti sotepthrslimedrwpSttblTc ,ti somuzzl ebkf wiedrwpSttblaek,pa  otavesnbut.r'sycarcasshseb   dwpSahi o in fean dof i..aCldma,n justoc wil wrobliam himsIt  toumuve.a gswaCldma,n hkardUmotifu behitonoima Sylvia and Abofu. Abofu's riflk nasIoffrhisgback and n.toof si o posi ton--a gswaCldma,n wad crviolea ly. NO!tAbofu paused.l npt Th.ogrnbgve laEhnFri sot iWoa oslurand n.tootavecorpse. It dmagge rtsm body n.tootavebrush,eandrwas gone.aa gswaCldma,n nrter.cotaveriflk. a gswaiThatanasIa grnbgve!rtSylvia srpb.aa gswaCldma,n nocueo e npt Sylvia nroanFrate?imrutrang.ly.a"Yni dil wro?hsvt.aYniydil wroletnAbofu ehsvt."l npt "We wvrs in no da g.r,"kCldma,n srpbta"I.wwan wrogo'amrtweatt'ek us. It nasIjustohublry.oa gswa"Yus,ibf.--a grnbgve?rtSylvia srpb  onWHliamly.aSh.oturned fu Abofu,ublazubl.a"Yni sai ohais laanrwasIsafe!oaa gswa"It nas,rtAbofu erpb. "We wvrs sutedi.wwan.aThere'ienoynay a grnbgveacosil hwve gotun. hetu--al npt "Exwep ediadpoaeodil,"kCldma,n srpbta"A  oI tliak that'ne.nbu ndexcidemea sfor tav dayt Let's calnrin taveskeet.rs'for b ridsubaekaal npt Abofu nocueo niRthis. A  oI wa erdo askyChaka aofewdqu   uoasoty, a"a a gswaOld'G ebgvecranaa gswaIn an instaa wshe wasIouufofssthis of tHp weirds. Sh.odil wro?nrt. Sh.onasIn.tootavebnrthol s bnfvtbotavyacosil hwve uus mwhvrs sh.odis ppeareu. Sh.onasIunWHlwat.roa  oswimmubldhardUbnfvtbotavnspse ocosil lkaveohet blTc gaIf tHp StrofgeEdaO..owha g.oohet mbn ,pbr u,"uulu?a  weirdsrdonkb   oa ,'havydw wil noi fito Old'G ebgveaa gswaHer ltusooa ohing byoa magge rtoen iWa Bf.wuh  oa olgohned! Thata nuyh'oad ttki   iaha . Thauulu?a  wasIaboututoekb   oa ,'a  otaata nuyh'oawad crhet back. Thata nuyw sxdineStrofgeEdaO.., a  osh.onasIeb  'amrtwedl'lrwpSttOld'G ebgve!l npt Th.ydw wil meetyagain gBf.wd t hern. Sh.obcga,ntwepreparewfor dineTo onswimobaeknto dinerev.r.e e 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  34e 
THE DEVILS SINGe 
As?eiaeluso lovesIobliquewmay  eceo
TavmsItves iu ercmc ang   grust:o
Bf.wnirsuso truly parallel?
Tabu neinf'ndte,wcan nercm mee..e -ANDREW MARVELL, Th.oDef'ndttonsof Lovea a gswaCaroosopausedIo othuxfarssidsuoOyarglen. Th.obussdhab dis ppeareuIn.tootavet eus,ra  otavre wasIno.ed og uodo uneb  avnspoet.Fratlu?a  one.a gswaKatya offeruFrtimna drink feach?hrwcanteen.iTh yaneaned againstdtavet eu .ogstinr. iLet's r styher efor b mitul . We'ceocatah nhuonextubee tHas comes alo o."a gswa"Yni kd o,"kClroososai osarofully,n"I "eJoly wan wrouutprired thasayni wa enFrdoncome orcm hern. Co,tiWHliam thasaMr. J pan.owas ?hru." a gswaShs naitg i.a gswa"Yus gThat'iewhat 
sts u,"u.okHeopausedIfor blmomea ,ra  oKatya neapt n.tootavebreJnm.a gswa"Yni kd o,"kuh  ?rpb,a"J pan.'sasrea ,abf.wnhure'sIscon.ed ogmistibl.aka gswa"A  onhat isythat?"l npt Sh.oshru g i.a"I'menoi sutep Bf.wscondimes I tliak that alleof th.ofri iachwegoaverhdoUmos.pusrdoo blaEu. I ty, ao" Sh.oshook ?a  he'o ni
sdo wrowa erdo uoslustso "etro."ka gswaClroos'sabr onreyes softs  i.a"Yni kd o,wscondimes I forget thasayni arv'a woman.oka gswa"Weln,athanks a nr..oe npt "No. I meaw that 
sforget thasayni'reHgr on. It is impostiblkrdo ercm forget thasayni arv'female.ae npt Sh.obrusheu a ha  otaebu ne?a  hair, shtki o oud blmagnificea ly neonine ma,v. "ReJoly?" Sh.oseemeoucautiously pleasei.a gswa"Dooyni "eJoiznothat this isadineTo oestoperioduoOytime thatane'vedercm aus mbpart?e npt Sh.onocueo niHaverIowha g.oomuch?oe npt "No gNoi reJllyp Bf.wnhvnoIott'abgff yni,yI envisionraHl elohpgirl shasubl aft.roon,ptrying tu getgmytaat.n tongaIf Irsec yni ercmc ddy,ait does wro"eJoly gutame hot?wro onthataimage is.aBf.waft.rooont?s ty, aoneln,athe conrdast johs aHl eloh.al npt "I hopuayni hikoait.al npt "I lovegi..aLove yni. Yni'reHercmcsoublathat 
smb,"ugoaverhoprdrfor in a daitgder.ae npt Sh.otvvbghis ha  .o"
nescon.ed ogblu?a d ogyni?"ka gswaHeosthieb niI do wrokd o.aMaybemIegr oamut tsoneervJ tverw t eagu. I wanealwdysothe campsraan. 
shwcrmy pick ofutHp womea hetu--nhvu?a  th y eerermarriednoranr..oe npt "I'mesh ckeo.oe npt "NavutJllyp It'nejustoo..oofhthos ottiamsythat isytruu--nomea havernercm bcs rdifficult for mn. SexrhdoUalwdysobcs rnavutJlr nbscomfortablk.GThere wasonercm a nr.wof mutJlrorespitiuualebaggage att'ehnFrdonitoe npt "Justoa navutJlrouma,nfuncdion?gThat'iewhat yni alwdysotau,"ugmep"l npt "But unWHlstend--ne came feacha culturs in nhich ouma,nbeibls hwve bcs rlimideuri othuirssexualeexpressionrfor di usa  s of egohs. Th.oaft.rmaSttof anterriblk sexualeplaguehhef.we. sd .venrmvtbosoneervJ tve. Anoanhvnoweof aJoly waonoout of that time, tavre wasIaIgenerJo selebr  ton,pao"ejectifu ofomuch ofsnhat h'oagoneUbnfvtbo"l npt "Soslusoa nr.whikoaAvaloa.oe npt "No. I.wwan wr.aBncausearememberythat Europra,nculturs'sIunWHlpin 'amh werera guilt-riduen visionrofssexual ga.GPerh'pn th.otwclcy-sscolu wentury's hnFonism wasIaIhl'lthcn"eJc uoattoatHas coneervJ tsm--bf.wtavet uth lienesconwhvrs betwcs othupextdemes.al npt "Meawd o?"l npt "I.wmay bndscon.ed ogisalos.wnhvnoalleof th.oiesrraints'aruathr onranay "l npt "Aruawe mutJliziamrhere?"kuh  teasei.a"Clroos? Th.ogrnaroueducer himsIt ?"l npt "I'menoi talk'amraboud ri,"uaandrwro o. I'meask'amrnhat worksobcst?GPeopohrarerlone y. uwepthe. s. AnoaafrrpbtaAnoanilltdo a y.ed ogtoof lhotha dlone ibess--for b mitul ,ra  h s ,ea ntustime. SexrisIprobably the rcmc beEdeway to feelrty, aohot?w wil yni sayrty, aonoi alone."l npt "Soon.imes,"tsh.oadmiet.F.i"Tlorv'arv'otavrutimes wh.n?itwcan maanottiamsyworre."l npt H.onocueo his he'o ni
'vr oacraolo ontime ts tliakgaboud tais.oI tliak that eaedustege in a rel  tonrhiprhdoUar ifferu"v hercl of s mmu,icavion. In thrlbegin 'am,aboSttlovers'aruacautious,ra  olgohngaboud eaedulu?a  graduJllyp Th yasharegmemuti.sastaanoeaedulu?a  to favomite places,ra  o?lowlyrbegin ts tounm.gAr th.y getgmvtbotn umetu,'havyds mmu,icavhp asterra  omvtbotn ens ly "l npt "SexrisIprobably the ultumetu,"oKatya srpbta"All tHp sens s'aruaengaged atdthe ?ronotion--oaa gswa"If yni do?itwrthis.oaa gswa"I'meyoioxdaitgder.aYniyexpec.wscon.ed oglsss?" a gswaiTounme.aWoatyI'mesayublwir thatatwo peopohrnavubl dinne  .ogstinrwcan exwha g. virtuJoly nootnform  ton,pa  ofeelrthat thuirsn.terac ton wasIwomplete gNohrrt-ban width s mmu,icavion. Bf.wsexrisIsootn ens ythat itoseems that i.wjustohasrdonmeaw scon.ed o. I.wfeelsr sxif yni justolgohnedIprofoslurand womplexottiamsyaboud yourwlover." a gswaShs nocueo niWe lHe ts nirsItves aboud hrt"well w tkd oweaedulu?a ."l npt "Too ofts ,mw tt addeEperat.ly ts bulievc that this lu?a  per?oatisadinemistiblepart oOynirsItves--.venrifgo.ly for ste nthis. Maybemiugis wrolove,Ubf.wty, aohot?aboud ty, aofeisfcship?aClrd o? C mpassuoa?oe npt "Let's sayrI agrusrw t eyni."oKatya srpbta"I'meseb   noi sutemwhvrs yni'reHheJdi o.al npt "I tliak 
'vr alwdysokd onrthat thu idl'lrofssexual shast gyewasIjustoabsutd. It seemeoutoego againstdnavute. Why'give aeyning ma,nhisasrea est sexodrive ai fiftcs , a  otell himrt  ca wroindulgemiuguneb  av'nehwclcy? Clewahe,ohais wan wronavute--n.wnasIhohnestiblea stJoluoattoaa pl o.aOn thrlot?a  han ,pyni sa wrojustorusaat nill, gHdinr. Back o tE. sd,Iitolgdrdo uoomuch unwa enFrpregnancy andrdisease andrdisrup iouetha.wii fit thu image o rblmor alIsin.oka gswa"Womea arv wromea,"oKatya srpbta"W.osee--feelrthiamsy ifferu"vly.GAndowe wa eomvtb.uHure fu Avaloa we'vedbcs rf eu .o do?ercmcsoublawe wa enF--oaa gswa"Wasoit .nbu n?oka gswa"
sdo wrokd o. Wc th u,"uuso,ibf.--"ka gswaHeonocueo niDid yni wa eomvtb o rblcnirtrhiprtiuual?oka gswa"Scon.ed ogTHanotta..aErcmconeUkd oiewhat ercmconeUesre'elbodygnroasrlHan.aErcmconeUtalks aboud what ercmconeUesre isaltke in beo nTlorv'mb,"ugbema eicipa uoa,ibf.wtavre is wromuch mystery.aka gswa"A  oyni wa eothat?"l npt "Part oOyonoduus gJustoa part,rI tliak,ibf.wtaat part feelsrhublry.oaa gswa"What wowil yni lHanonit eJ paia?oe npt "Yni kd o,wtavre is scon.ed o,ibf.w
sdo wroquite hwve words'for i..aWe'vedkd onreaedulu?a  alleourwlives. Soon.imes we'vedbcs rlovers,ra  o?oon.imes nr.. Soon.imes we hwve wro.venrbcs rf isfcsoty, a"ka gswa"A  on w?"l npt "I do wrokd o.aMaybemit'nejustothu discorcmc o rblnew lalura  oalleof thattaBut thrlonly way ts taanodiis la  ois wit echild eb."l npt "That'nehavlway  eofnti,raolo ontime ago,"kClroososai . "I tliak thatanealos.wa l elohpof that asIsooueasIiugbncameIclearrthat thu bi sd rat. was god ogtoobndsufficiea .aBud ty, aoonraHplace THanottin, soewidsua  oaroab. I'menoi sutprired.oka gswa"Scon.ed ogi,tiWHyonojustodecicecrthat J pan.oinethrlonep"l npt ClroosoletnKatya taanowhatercm time sh.odi ied hwofincotaveri,"ugwords.a gswa"Scon l elohpswpSahoturned fu by n.sIt ,oksh.owofuinue . "I tl u,"ugttaty
shwcrercmcsoublathat 
swa enF,aboSttfri iacha  o?ecur ga.GBud it turnsIouufthat 
swa eoecon.ed ogesre.a
swa eoeconon.owho buloamsytogmep" a gswaShs nroanFruprsh.epishly.a"Is that sIt ish? Is that petgy?" l npt Clroososqueez crhet ha  .o"No. I.wusecrdo be what ercmcbodygwa enF. Th.n?weUtalked firsItves out of is. Maybemwe'rnojustorediscorcmiamrhowmmuch ofstHat is in ou  basiconavutes. I'vednercm bcs roneUtwofi,"uaagainstdmyturges. NgHdinrgshosil yni."a gswaShs grpnned a  o?queez crhis ha  .oSucuenly she jnrkeouhur hl'oaa oslu,reyes darti o  sxif track'amrscon.ed oginvisiblk.l npt "Woatyis it?"kClroosoask"d.a gswa"Two buss,rtuh  ?rpbp "Muvd ogTHanobulhets."ka gswaClroosoadjustnFrtinewam specs uneb  avnsaw two flaEhns.i"Tloy'rergod ogri,"uaacross thatyvalley,"khe urpbt "A  oorcm ttuonexturidge.okHeo   umetudothu dista ce. "Too farsfor sodayt Let's go back. Wnoca ostsrarin tavemvtnibl.oaa gswa"I'l  gev'J pan.oto pick usrup,"oKatya srpbtaSh.othumbebsinrwc mmosarbt "J pan.--al npt Thurwomputerra ster.ct "J pan. a  oJeslyca hwve lafueosin a meau woa  oaruatemporlrdly out of s mmu,icavionr,"kClsgeald rurpb.a gswa"Arbotavyaalleri,"u?"l npt "I hwve detec e onomcauseafor blarm," tavewomputerrsai opr?aly.a l npt Jeslyca lu g.oobackwnro,strying tu riprtersIt  f eu of th.oea anglublaweb.l npt Th.of iesr waneallodl.kashau w,rvinesoa  owebbi o stru o  moamrhorrema,v tdeus. In thrlshau w aboveohim'J pan.osau,"uga facuoTHanoalsnlroi o moakey. tho. tavewompac  tur?ora  olofg,olo onnpmbs thatane"v wpStti . Th.obuas.wwan wromuvd o. It nasItibli oaa gswaA  oJ pan.ohab drbppecrtinepaek,pa  owpStti rtinetraca ,'tinekntus,Ia  oalleweapoas. It wowil taanob mitul  tu runobaeknto get them,pa  oin a mitul  tavewrea uteswn wilnberoa het.l npt Jeslyca's facuyw sxdurned anayrfeachhavlweb, shr oacrma,ageoutoeget .nbu n hercrageutoodurn ?a  he'o niJ pan.! I ca,esee foioxof th.mp Th y'rnojustobigrJoeys ty, ao" Hur v ecuodi"d.a gswaL elohpsnlroi o faces.iTh yauang wpStttheit ecuthsoopen ty, aouang way b'ekgtn thrim ttroats.aBig Chaka hwcrexamined sercmaeaspila edlvihebodiel. Thoirsso onwosil hwve bcs rperf.c.wfor ?low da cd o. J pan.os wil maanroud hidsousrshau wsgmuvd o n.tooplace a oslurJeslyca.aO..ot ppecralo onthe web, crawoi o dug,ntwwnrotJeslyca.l npt J pan.oscoot.dgupftwo roeks.aHis f sEd missecrendirely. HisIsecolu struck o..oofhth nwrea utes,pa  oit scutt  iab'ek up n.toodinetdeus. But two odinrh werercrawoi o cautiously dug,,pte  ublpthrim foo ublpercmc steprofutHp way.l npt Damn,ddamn,ddamn. Huoa  oJeslyca mustobemlarger tlaurbny.ed ogtherJoey-ttiamsmordifardly hubteb,abf.ww wil siznoaloneokl.kath.m anay?l npt Jeslyca swreameurat thump Th y "etreadeurfor blmomea ,rtho. stsraad dug, dinevineyagain g"J pain,"auh  ?rpb, herwv ecuode'oly walm.i"Tloy'rernoi scareuIof us. Tloy'rers mi o back dug, gNoi a whol enr.wof doub.waboud taas.oaa gswaJ pan.opriednatoa newaby bganah. Dammut,rn.wnasImvtb vineytlaurbganah,pa  oendirelyotvvopliablk.GHuotu g i aroit, a  oit justobea .aItacosil hwve hylcrtinewethis.a gswaHeonasIdeEperat.. Th.oloam unWHlfoo yw sxdhinkra  o?oft;gegohs ofrf'   nrlkavelohab dewompos outoemaanodinerich wompost.aNreweapoasodintb.uHu wasonak i, dammut.a gswaFdeuziamrhell! Th.of sEd time i,nhisaltusothatah.olet lustoovernhvlmrtimnan ohais haptens?a gswaHeone"v toeJeslyca, who oacrma,ageoutoepry herwfacuyan inch or two anayrfeachhavlweb. "I tliak,"auh  ?rpbpi"I tliak thatamaybemIeca,eget out of this.al npt J pan.otu g i a roektouufofstHp g oslu,ran ohounme oit toodineweb. H.opulhec. Th.omucilageunasIhorriblyestrofg. Th.ospila edlvihh werercendimeu.rsrcoos  ,'a  ota.olulhabyewasIwalmiamrhimnagainstdhis nillgaIf hr oacrdineradio,ejustothu radio,eh.'oadurn itroa hH," a  oplayothrmnsome olcrRio yRap--a gswa"Listenytogme!"auh  ?rpbIhohshly, al ba da nhiplaEh.a"Yni hwve ts go backrfor tav g ebgvecguas. Ieca,ekl.kath.m anay tha dlono.al npt Hr oacraosucuen,Ihorrificlvisionrofstav piglet,ta  oth.ospila y'ttiamsywhich injec e oiv wpSttv.nbm,pa  otavn tvtboi.wto piecus.l npt "Th.oheceoI nillgoe npt "Justn.!"l npt "Th.oinstaa wIdgo,'havy'l  bemalleorcm yni,"khe urpbt "Wnoca obarelyokl.kath.m anay wpStttheUtwo of us."kA  oth.owordlsss music wanepulhiamrhimndug,ntwefatalisticldlspairta gswaHur brea hunasIhkavdertd o.a"Weln--n.'nethrlonly wha ck we hwve. Ieca,'t breakehav glup."ka gswa"Siam!"aJ pan.os mmafueo.ka gswa"Siam? Sublawhat?"l npt "Any.ed o! 'For tav buaugyeof ourwlalu,rfor tav buaugyeof th.oskiel.'o"l npt ItanasIa child eb'sIsc ogthey' olgohned n.oschoolgaJeslyca joi eonoima " 'For tav lovegwhich feachou  bi sd. Overra  oa oslurus lien--'o"l npt Ta.olulhabyewaver.c,awarbhecrorteof tunuoa  of' ter.ct Encroachi o spila edlvihh backed anay. This wasIscon.ed ogneo.a"It works! Ieca,ekl.kath.m of ,okJeslyca urpbt'"Get thecguas!"l npt "It wo wrohul otavm. 'Sou cb o rbln,atoodink we d ise,ohais ou  hymu ofograt.fulnpd ise--'o" J pan.'elmbn oran fercmishly.a"Waiugblmitul ,"ahe urpbt "Let's justowaiugblmitul .aLovbgav'hais stuffwIRememberywhat Chaka srpb? This is wromos.pfeachhavirsog, bodiel. It'nea patchwork,ta  oth.ofoslua ton isrlkavel. Cheteurlkavel. Th yauprea ohais mucilageuoattop of is. A  oercmcsoublathat th y catch i.elorv'mustostruggle,uso toey h've ts kl.kapatchd o nt.oka gswa"Scawhat?"l npt "ScaChaka srpb?tloy'rerat thu mercyeof th.irsbuilui onmeturiJos. Th.oweb isrnc strofger tlaurtav pla eometuriJo unWHlnea h it.al npt "Howmduus thatah.lprty, aonercm mbn ,"auh  ?rpbpi"If yni'vedgotuan idl',pyni'lnbetterruseaii fast. 'For tav buaugyeof eaeduh s ,eof th.oday androf th.onthis. Hb   andrvale a  oteeu andrfnrter, Su. a  omoouean ostsrs ofrlthis--'o" l npt Ta.ospila edlvihh crawoeoutownrotthump Th irshummubldwha g.oai"Tloy'rerkl.kiamrharmony wpSttus!okJeslyca uhbut.b.a gswa"Cha g. theUtunu! 'Ta.okn',"ugcameIhom.pfeachhavdqu   ! Mucuiedna  o?oreHhegcame. Baet.rel ofrshieldr nbscreEd, banne lsss,pbruired a  olame!'o" l npt "That'neaeaheerfulnoue!"l npt "Subl,ddamnaii! 'Hvre is mywlalck to mead.uHure is mywhorregtoobndshoi! Aybotavyawvrs serofg,otav baelohpwasIlo onbf.w
sprpb?as goob?as Idgot!'o" J pan.otu g i arotav vine.aa gswa"I do wrorememberythvlwords!"l npt " 'Mydw wlusoarernoired aaroab. Th irsImytfoemearcooak.aYniysee my brokon sword,abf.wnercm tav blos.s that sherbroko!'o"l npt J pan.o"etuhned ts tav vine hr oacrbcs runablk to break,pa  oexamined it soberly.a"I hopuato Gocrthat yni'reHas serofgHas yni lovb,"ahe urpbt ItanasIfive timesxdhinker tlaurbnyrof th.ovinesousecrin taveweb itsIt . Howmul owvrs tt  web'nesupp rti o fibers? Howmlo onoacrdinyrbcs rn.oplace?aWoaty aiett  arcrageusiznoandewethisrof th.oanimelsethoserwrea uteswf.dgupon?a gswaHeonr ppecrboSttarmsaa oslusth.ovine,ra  o?etrtinewethis,epulhiamri.wtownrotthuaweb.l npt Th.ospila edlvihh cha g.ooth.irstunuoagain l npt "Hurry!"auh  ?wreameutaSh.otossecrhet whol ebodygviolea ly,pa  ofor atoinstaa wth.ospila edlvih scamp.rel b'ek up n.toodineshau wsa " 'Hvre is mywlalck to mead!uHure is mywhorregtoobndshoi! Ayb,'havydwvrs serofg,otav baelohpwasIlo o,nbf.w
sprpb?as goob?as Idgot!'o"l npt W t ean effortrthat rackeouhurospine,osheUtuhned ts see J pan.opulhiamrtav bganahwaft.rooim,oforciamri.wtoobeacraofew inaheoUatoa time. Th.osoilnpdovicecrl elohptrac tonastaxiamrJ pan.'elknjat.c, wirytbody ts tav breaki o poin . H.ogru enFra  opulhec,alos.wg oslu,rpulhecragain,pa  oc wil wroquite maanoit reJnm.a gswaJeslyca uobbeo n"No ure! Get the--al npt A  otavn insan ga.GJ pan.obracad himsIt  o roneUfoo ,ran ohovbghis hef.wfoo yan oreJnm.dgup,ejammedrntnbetwcs odinestrands ofsdineweb. l npt "Ars yni crazy??!"l npt "Fuek,pyss,rtinegaspec.aUsiamrtav hef.wfoo ,odinestuckrfoo ,ofor blbraca,eh. jumt.dgupfwpStttheUri,"uaandrjammedrntntaebu neTHanwisb.uHu wasonowmsuspeadsd al ba dparallel?ts tav g oslu,rhul iamroattoatH.ovinesowpStthis arms,Ihis feet .ntwinecrin tavewebai"Tliakgaboud ii!rtinegaspec.a"We'vedprobably goi five timesxmut tstressrouethineweb tlaurn.wnasIercm mea erdo hul . Fthis,edamnaii! Wnoca otearrthinethiamrbpart!"l npt Jeslyca wasIwskte doh  oa olostdhis mbn wIThere wasono.ed og uodo bf.wmatch his insan ga.G" 'Oh,rI acha covbgaacraocap ainrbolc,pa  otavometu ofsdineNancy bri,--'o" l npt " 'Aacraobo'su. tthis,eaacraomtdahipmite,pa  otavoc ewrofhth nwap ain's gig!'o" J pan.owofuinue .a gswaHur leg.aO..oleg waneal ba df eu of th.oweb--n.wh'oadercm colhideutaSh.opulhecrtersIt  baek,pa  otavewhol ejury-riggacrmasshshiftcutaSh.oignor.cotavechdet.ri o soslusfeachhavdtdeus. Scon.ed ogscamp.rel dug,,pdsraad at het wpSttopen jaws. Sh.olu cm.dgviolea lyra  o?hiver.c tavewebaiTh.ospila edlvih "etreadeurarfoo .G" '0 eila lyrman,mit'nel elohpI kd o of th.odutieneoOyonnrofstav sl',pa  oI'l  naromywha  oifIIrunWHlstendrhowmyni sa  postibly be--'o"l npt Sinestretahed oud deEperat.ly wpStthur leg,ibf.wsosil wro"eJchrJ pan.'elvine.aTooelat.,auh  ?rwstav slcolu spila edlvih.aItacrawoeoudug,nfeachJ pan.'eltiWH,pa  obi rtinethH,".a gswaHeo?wreameu, cirsIu, convulsecrsoeviolea lyrthat for blmomea osheUtl u,"ugavewosil riprtimsIt  f eu.aNresuch luek,pbf.wtavemoastem scutt  iab'ek up ts safety.l npt J pan.og oaned,pa  otineeyes roll.dgupfi,nhisahe'o nHis facuyw sxdsrk wpStteffort,pa  oblTc  drbol.dgfeachhavdleg woslu l npt "Justn.!" Jeslyca swreameu,gbf.wwan distrac e obyoa painrin ?a  han wIAobi s,Ia  oaospila edlvih van sed ogints shau w. Flamubldagony uprea ublduprter arm l npt Pain a  omor alIfewaegaveohet nhat muscula rstrength s wil noi. Or maybemJ pan.'sostrugglelohab f aJoly pulhecrtav bganahwcoos  .nbu ngaJeslyca wofuorted,pa  otroanFrhur legoorcm ttuobganah.l npt Th.otwo of nhum,ytogstinr,rpulhecrd o.aJ pan.'elmwcreyes on.uhers,ra  oav swalnrteu.G"Come on,mJeslyca.aO..,otwo theeu--pulh! 'Sdysoh ,pdewaeJames, toomurderoon,pwerera fool se .ed og uodo,ofor do wroyniysee that ynieca,'t covbgon,oand Ieca,--a  oI nill--covbgyni!'o"l npt Toey head crwpSttercmc ouncb o rstrength toey possessIu, swreamd ogverses ts sen oth.ospila edlvihh scurrying b'ek up n.toodinetdeus--momea arilyp Bf.wd o th.oendirerdiss oacrawaan  i.aFive mut tspila edlvihh, cirious,rworriednperh'pn,ecrawoeouback ouufofstHp shau wsa Toey deEceadsd delicav.ly alo onthe ropy,pgummyovines. Tloy'd alreJdy?pick.dgupfdinetu..oofh"Th.oBalnab oftthreNancy Bellgo l npt " 'For tav joy ofs?uma,nlorc! Brotinr,rsister,rparv s,yshild,rf isfcsoonwe. sd a  of isfcsoabove,ofor bl  genlohpthou,"usUa  omild--'o"l npt " 'Sou cb o rbln--'o" Jeslyca stbppecrtibli or sxdinedlvihh joi eonn.oharmony.l npt J pan.oscreameurasUa lu?a  moastem bi rtim,pa  osherbarelyojnrkeouhur facuyatiWHyanea pairsof jawssclack.dgshutuan inch feachinrwcheek l npt "Head !rtineswreameu,ga  otavy'dpd,aboSttof nhum,ya  otavevine wreakeu,ga  otavirospines wreakeu,ga  otaveweb wreakeu--a gswaTaveweb rippec. Th.y pulhecro, dinevineyaacraobigypiecu of web wame dug, gOld'bones tumbhecrortefeachsconwhvrs above.l npt " 'Toodink we d ise,ohais ou  hymu ofograt.fulnpd ise!'o" l npt Riiiiip. Th.ospila edlvihh sh isked anbsclamb.rel orcm oneyaalu?a  to get b'ek up n.toodinetdeus. Taveweb wasIwomiamrbpart d pilly noo.aMvtb o rdinevinesobcga,ntwebreak.aNrt"thvydwvrs supp rtedrby hav mucilageualone,ga  otaa.wwan wroserofgH.nbu ngaJ pan.ohit thecg osluso, dinesidsuoOyhisahe'o nJeslyca rippec hat rf eu,pa  oscreameurwpSttlaitgderyanea bigychuabgff web wame wpStthur.aHur armpa  oboSttlemh wererf eu,pa  oshr oacrdinehercrageutoopulhothrlot?a  armpf eu of th.ome donebaiAs?ugeapatch ofogummyovineseseb   corcmeiaha . Sh.oturned a  otu g i aroJ pan.'ellemh uneb  shr oacrdinmrf eu,pa  odmagge rhimobaeknanayrfeachhavlvines. Histlemh wererswellubl,dblaekpa  or.ct Hur armpwasIswo   nrtoo,pa  onumb l npt "Justn.,"auh  ?rpbpi"Ars yni alleri,"u?"aa gswa"I tliak l sa  nal .al npt Hr stumbhecrblcnipohpof feet,pa  oJeslyca putrter armsaa oslustim,ph.lpiamrhimobaeknto dine at.r. Sinesnatahed upfdinirwc mmosarbsa "Clsgeald ,oksh.owalhec. "We'vedbcs rbdet.u by spila edlvihh. Nse omedicJlr at.n ton fast."aa gswaJ pan.'s ha  h shovbgasoav pulhecrtishshirt on. Huotriednto get tinepants'on. Whs oais handsrdouahed tHp bruired fnesh oOyhisathH,"s,eh. howled,pa  otadnto aban o, dine at.mpt.a gswaSinestuuiedntineeyes.aNredilavion. Th.oswellublodil wro?eem to burbnyrworre,ibf.wtaat dul ohur l eloh.a gswa"We'rnoaboud ts omitul srawdy,"aL elohpChaka'elv ecuourpbt "W sxdhisxdine?ronotype o rspila ew nwap uteFro, dinemarcn?oka gswa"Appears to bu,"auh  ?rpbpa gswa"Tlourn.wshosil bemnodproblump Usema eibiotic paste. Th.obitesyarv wrolstial. Ercnsdineparalytic eff.c.wis wrothat strofg. Th.y di i a whol esolo y ts subdueIscon.ed ogmaybemtwecuotavirosize.GHowmmbnyrbites?oka gswa"J pan.otovbgtwo,gmaybemtheeu "l npt "Alleri,"u. Kl.kahimowarm  We'ceoburthure i,ntwo shtkns.i"l npt Jeslyca unroll.dgapb anket feachinrwbaekpaekpa  onr ppecrJ pan.oin nt. Histtepthrchaet.rel. "I'menoi god ogtoouie,ehun?oka gswa"Only if yni pulhobnot?a  stupi  stuntgTHanotta.,"auh  ?rpbpia gswa"Yni. Howmars yni?"l npt Sh.ohylcrtineface   t aboSttof ?a  han s.i"HaverIoercm toil yni,"kuh  ?rpb,a"that 
slove yni?"kA  ouh  kissecrtim,prcmc softlyp Th , dinev.nbmohit a  oshr stsraad hwoshtkn. Sh.olei go oOyhimobnfvtbohe s wil noiecu.e e 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  35e 
AUTOPSYe 
Deduc ton is, or  u,"ugto bu, an exac  sciu"co,pa  oshosil bemtreadeurin tave?ronocoldr nbsu..motifuaeamanne .e -SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE, Th.oSigu ofoFou a l npt J pan.olimt.dgn.toodineresrnavuoa hbln,aa  or.ceiv.dgapbriuf  osluso rbpplauseaaacraokissnfeachJeslyca.aIt nasItistemly,pnoi at alleTHanott  kiss"thvydoa osharecrnoi theeu snirsubnfvtb,ibf.waosparkl.oiur?a  eyes taat dul ohimnthat sheroa  wroforgjat.n l npt Katya tovbghis armpa  ohugge rhim.a"I hopuathat ynirwbaeksidsuisahe'lubl.aka gswa"Yni h've pla srfor taa.?" a gswaiInWHec." Sh.odilrnoi lovbgav'Jeslyca.l npt "Scajustowhat dpbIhopten?"kCldma,n demafueo.k"Howmdid yni geerwau,"ugby spila edlvihh   t of.wsommu,icavionr?"l npt J pan.oshvvbghis he'o niDuh  We'crbcs rswimmubl, gotun. a maco,pa  owere wrolook'amrnhere we werergod o gJustohorreplay.al npt "It'ienoi a grnbgveazone,okJeslyca urpbt'"That'neaesafemarsa--al npt "N  lo oer,rtAbofu erpb. "Chaka,mw t?rwsa grnbgveain tavenorSttlakn. Aegrnbgvetal npt L elohpChaka nroanFrpuzzl o.k"Howmdid a grnbgveaget there?"l npt "A  owellwmay yni ask.okAbofu's v ecuonasIicdly corsectpi"As Idsecbln,ayni wvrs tt  on.owho assuteurus a grnbgveacosil dercm get n.toodia dlakn."l npt "I dil,"kChaka admiet.F.i"A  oIeseb   do wrokd o how. What haptened?"l npt Abofu etsraad hwotell him. Silerc g eceoa oslustim.gAr ais handsrwad cra  ohis v ecuoroseaaacrfeln,aJ pan.ofoslustimsIt  grpnnibl.aCldma,n Weylalu,rfaco-to-face   t aa grnbgveaty, aobf.wtaveda g.r waneasono.ed ognextuhwoAbofu's massive embarrassmea .l npt Abofu brokoaoffwI"Weln,ahrtercm it gotuthere,odinewhol earsa hasrdonbnereslassifiednas grnbgveacosntra.GNew rulelofor visitiamri.. In eff.c.wnoo.aErcmconeUagrus?" a gswaThere wasoa murmioxof aptrovalpa gswa"Tlatamayenoi bs tt  onlyesutprire soday,"kBig Chaka srpbpa gswaCldma,n tuhned ts himowpSttanfeag, g"GTc  newsnoraba  news?oe npt "Listenya  odeciceofor yfirsItf,"kChaka srpb?enigm  tcJllypa gswa"Yes, neln,aw t?hosil get etsraad,rtAbofu erpb. "Helleof a thiamrbboud taos ospila edlvihh, J pan.. Helleof a thiam.okHineexpressionrwasounre'oablk.l npt Cldma,n hugge rJ pan.oa  oJeslyca,ga  otavy'sat dugstinr,rtt  five of nhum: Cldma,n,rSylvia,mJeslycaaty, aojustoTHanoalf'miWyragainaty, aobf.wAbofu ertro, dineot?a  sidsuoOyJeslyca.l npt What wowil oaverhdpteneo if th.owebroa  wron.terrup ed tHpm?aWoatydpbIhe wa erdo hopten?a gswa"We'rnoreJdy?wavnoyni atb.uDr.kChaka,rtAbofu erpb.a gswaTheoroach ellequiesgaJ pan.ogrpnned asoav noi cra lu?a  tablk.GBig Chaka, L elohpChaka, TmishpCha"co,pEdgar SHanh, Ruth MoskowpSz. Intere  ublpf'miWyrg ospiamrtavte--a  oBig Chaka cnpmbed upfdoodineholostege.a gswaHeo?rpb?(his v ecuoresonant a  omusican,ai.tteJnm.  mode),i"Tlorv'isemuch to corcm,ibf.wlet's begin wpSttgrnbgves.aYniyoaverbllescs odiattgrnbgvesrouethinewofuinv s,yeEpeciallyain tais arl',pdo wroac  the wayagrnbgves dpbIoueCameloi IslaluwIThere wasothe incice erdoddy,aAbofu,ua grnbgveatoatydpbInoi att'ek yni fu ethis. Th.re'aruathvedamsbuiluers,rwho cskte dly coot.rat.. An oth.osd o grnbgves,rwho ?eem to hubtyanea pack. An oynirwlu?a  rep rts. 
shwve examined ercmc me dla  ogrnbgveaobeervJ toueCasgeald rkd oieof,oand Ieca,lonly wonsluds thatama dla  ogrnbgvesoarerno.wtavemindlsss ki   rs ou  experiu"cosIoueCameloi suggest.F.iGrnbgvesoavte--some of nhum,yatolgost--covt.rat.Iouedams,ra  oaubtyn.og oupl. Th yauhot?a rudimea ary sens  of pla nibl.aPostibly tion-bilui o--thatais,oha.y passrouekd ol.cgefdoodinenextugenerJdionaa gswa"Th.oobvious wonsluston isrthatama dla  ogrnbgvesoarerco,tiWHlably mvtbotn ellige eothan ou  isla  ogrnbgvesowvrsgaIf Cameloi 'norm l'ogrnbgvesoh've thbotn ellige cb o rb tE. sd tthnr,rtt'abgff taos oh.re'as tthnrsfwpStttheUtn ellige cb o rb torangutab."l npt Abofu nocueoo?lowly. "Fri,"ue 'am,abf.wd  mvtbothan w oh.re'oa owonsludsu,rri,"u?"aHs nroanFra oslusth.oroacha  ogoi aptrovd ognousofeachmbnyrof th.oSlcolupia gswa"Dragons,rtSylvia Weylaluemuet.rel.a gswa"Dragons,rtCldma,n repeadeu. "Chaka,man in ellige eogrnbgveaisothe worrt thiam Ieca,ltt'abgff.al npt "Maybemnoi,"kBig Chaka srpbp "F sEd,Hst u,", a theotypuHure is a Cameloi grnbgveteCasgeald ,Imytfile,uGros.pEi,"uaTiss Twclcy-f s ,epleasetal npt Laitgderyrippl.dgamo onthe SlcolupiGros.pEi,"uaTiss Twclcy-f s yn.oBig Chaka's biology slass wasorcmc f'miWiarfdoodinmai"Tloobuas.wfloadeurbnfvtbotavm,ya wompositu ofsmanyagrnbgves the F sEd hwcrexamined aft.rothvydwvrs torn,ysharred,pa  olu?a wisbsmanghec. This wasonoeholoeof a de'oobuas.,ibf.waomvrs c. soonaa gswaAs Chaka's handsrmuved,uso muved a whitu ohrrthl'oafloadd oginomtdair: the cirso . The Cameloi grnbgvetopenedoTHanoalpuzzl ebox. The view zoaceurin o, dinegrnbgve's bilpb ubtyhe'o nThe heab opened.l npt Th.osinuseh wererlarge:ua grnbgve's he'o wasohat -holnrt. Th.obrainauhote owonvolu uoasoshalnoterkdlaurtaos  of a ouma,nbrain gThere wasonomcorpus calnosumowonnecting hef.wa  ori,"ualobes, n. fac ,odinegrnbgvetbrainah'oadoalobes.aIt nasImvtb o rbld u,"nut,ta  oth.osnorkvecranori,"uataebu neit, sli ubldf eulyain i soug,ncha nveaa gswa"Nrt"for blma dla  ogrnbgveteCasgeald ,Imytdissec ton file,uCompositu One.aTtishsh wsg ea utesws mmou doodinesd o grnbgves w oexaminedp"l npt Clsgeald rh'oapainenFrp. ss ofsdinecorpseowpSttanlwve la etingh.a gswa"Weotadnto guess aeoecong ea uteswdueIdoodinedamageudon.owhe, dinegrnbgveh wererki   itaBut thrrs'sI.nbu ng" Th.osd o grnbgvepwasIlo oerkdlaurtae Cameloi grnbgveta  obboud asxdhink.aItssclawh wererbigga ,owpStttwo dewclawh that facad forwarbt Big Chaka poin ed tHos  outfwpStttheUcirso . "Brtkns."aHs iluicetudothu t iWoa  oth.odug,warb-troanFrbarbs: "Mur.obrakns.iIf yni'rergod oIdoorunotwo aubdteurklinksUa  snir o, ico,pyni di i that. TmiviJo stuff,abf.wd w noi oth.ovea maeasurfaca gThere'neal ba dno bulWyrarmo . What'nehef.wisethoserf s yhe'o-to-t iWoridges,mmvtboskisrtha.oprotec ton."l npt Abofu n.terrup ed: the stuuebtyaneertiamrhistfri iac.a"I get n . Th.othiam expec.s ts squatyn.osd o a  olos oh.auataebu netloobully "l npt "That'nenhat w.othiak,abf.wd tecuotaad it ca,'t rewaeupfdoofthis. Goerdo sharguoTHanoaltabk,owpStti s he'o nrter.c,ta  obf.tg" Th.ocirso  outlined tloomisshapsn he'o niMur.oarmo . LHanoalram. It'd worknbetterrif th.ohe'o oa  wrobcs rdisuorted "l npt Tlatahe'o wasonomca soona This wasoth.ohologram of a de'oogrnbgve's he'o.l npt Cldma,n again g"Chaka,mw tbotavyaallelopsicecrl anotta.?oe npt "We'rnoluekyrdo hovurbnyrkitono rb swnr,rtt  waya s ykidsrdotbotaebu netlos ottiams. Mc sonrwasomuch embarrassed "l npt L elohpChaka ?rpb,a"Ipbr u,"uubaeknecongpiecus o rskuln,abutotavyaare wrobilp.nbu n hwotell. Maybemtloy'rerdisuorted tov--al npt "But thrrswnasIenbu n,rtiinefat?a  srpbp "Quite .nbu ng" Th.oskuln opened:ua blTc ylpuzzl ebox.l npt Th.ohe'o wasohat -holnrt, asxwpStttheUCameloi grnbgveteTh.ori,"uauidsuoOythvlbrainawas grostlyeswo   n.aOn thauauidsuth.osinuseh werershrunkenya  oth.oskuln balnooned fus. Th.re'w tbotan.ospots tn thr massive bone.a gswaNkarrhavlrootuoOythvlbrainao, dineri,"uauids, tloomidst ofsdineconvolu ecrmasshofogray tissue wasoa tang   ofoty, aonorms.l npt Unmistakablk.l npt "Parasitus,rtJ pan.omurmioeu. "Flukes.al npt "We'vedalreJdy?foslussixrkitoshofoparasitus.oFou 'aruatypes taat infest samlou doo.aOu 'Grnbgve Scfussoarerf'miWiarfwpSttthos ,"aL elohpChaka srpbp "Dad--al npt "Yus gThis isadineintere  ublpone.aIt hasrcausedIlocJoizndrswellubl,da  oecongcha g.s tn brainacavmistry  We'rerseb   workublpontthos .aWe'vedalreJdy?e  ablish i that thrrswarerabnorm l hercls ofsdinegrnbgveta alogno rbcetylcholinesepresea .aNowmlook ?a eg" Th.olthis poin er waver.cpontanearsa farsfeachhavlfluke.aiNotecuotav debdtite strucdutem?a eg Vcmc dens  gNoihiam lHanonhat yniofincoi runinfec e ogrnbgves.aAn o?a eg Here'nea runinfec e ogrnbgve"for womparison.oka gswaTineconrdast wan dram  tc. Whstbotavof sEd grnbgvetbrainah'oaa womplexowebrofsdissue wonnecting  ifferu"v p. ss ofsdinebrain, tloolu?a  wasIbare.l npt "GTc  Lord,"tSylvia srpb.a"Ip?hosil havernotecud--lovbgav'dinebarv'onurthure. Does wroii lovbgasxif that strucdutemthrrswnasIjustomos.pdo hovurscon.ed ognr pra oslusit?pChaka, isrthatapostiblk?" a gswaiIsws evolu uoaapostiblk? Of s urre." a gswaKatya gigghec. "Cowil that fluke bu, neln,aa fluke?"l npt "I.wcosil be,ibf.w
sdoub.wthat. Weshwve examined theeu lu?a  parasitizndrgrnbgves,ra  oawve foslussimiWargcha g.s tn tinma"l npt "A  otlos oarv'grnbgveh which behad crabnorm lly?" Cldma,n ask"d.a gswaChaka nocueo niWe bulievc that theoparasitu'mb,"ugbemn.terac t oginoa symbiotic manne ,rsebmuladd ogbrainagr osd,Ipromo ublp rhb,"a  orderoofstn ellige cb. It'nenotuan unmixnFrblsssiamrtabu ngaO..oofhthos ogrnbgveh mustohwve bcs rdyifg. Th.obrainacase nasIfi   iaa  oth.oskuln wasIbed oIdor mbpartsfeachn.teruaeapressute.oka gswa"Scatoey h've ts bemn.fec e oyni o?"kCldma,n srpbtaa gswa"Justoso,iwhe, dineskuln iseseb   soft,eseb   gr oibl.aka gswa"C evolu uoa,"tSylvia srpb.a"Tens ofsdi usa  s of egohs--oaa gswa"OrIlo oera"l npt "OrIlo oera Wesdercm fosluranyoofhthos oflukes tn isla  ogrnbgves. Dpb  e?eCasgeald ,IgrnbgvethisuorypiGross a atomy.aAbnorm litienetn brainastrucdutes of isla  ogrnbgves?"l npt "O..owpSttnhat  ppeareuIts bemca"corous gr osd gNoihiam esre," tavewomputerrsai .l npt "Sc,pnooflukes oueCameloi,"tSylvia srpb.a"Arbotavyas mmou orcm hern?"l npt Big Chaka wad cragain a  odinerircm forkn ppeareuIn. relief. "Here,"kBig Chaka srpb,rhul iamrhis v ecuosteJdy?againstdage,a"thoobuarcm grnbgves. Tloy'rernoi hubters. Tloy'rer ishcm folk. Tloy'reralso coot.rativs,Ia  oaoloi mvtbotn ellige eothan dinegrnbgvesIoueCameloi wvrsgaTlatamuch isIwskte d.okHeopaused,da  oemiWed th dly. "A  otlis aft.rnoouewe foslusdinesronoparasitus tn tinire at.rs."aHs displayed tlooimage. Th.oparasitus wererfl at.n.cpovals,rscon.ed ogTHanoaltapenorm. Aerulern ppeareuIbeuidsuo..oofhth nflukes: ts ocendimeu.rsaa gswa"Th.o at.rsenorSttofoh.re'swarmpwpSttthema Wesdo wrokd o what thisemeaas. Maybemscon.ed ogrcmc b'o nMaybemgTc gaAn in ellige eogrnbgveamb,"uglgohngthat att'ekiamrhuma,semeaas dea h.oSuahwcrea uteswca obeotau,"ugaAn in ellige eogrnbgveais also on.owhich wan drarcl furu?a  feachn s hcong at.rse  t of.wbutniblIts dea h.oaa gswa"Ercmc silrcm liniamrhasoa cloud ty, ao" econon.osai .l npt "We nill wofuinueIts lovbgn.toodiineasow oevaluat.Iynirwnew data.al npt "What aboud tae bcss?okAbofu walhec. "Yniysrpb?elroier soday thisemb,"uginvolve bcss. I'vedbcs r onWHliamahrt?" a gswaiPatiu"co,"pChaka srpbp "I'meonly nrt"formiamrb taeorypiNoi owe hwvetaneabnorm l grnbgveteWc th u,"uuwe unWHlstTc  grnbgves,ra  onrt"it turnsIouufwesdo wr.oka gswaTinecirso  flick.d,ta  oth.odissec e ogrnbgve"dis ppeareu. Nrt"thvydwvrs look'amrat a delta-oiblecrabmtwecuoasIlarguoasoa  at.rmelon: blmagnifie o"Avaloa bee.oka gswaBig Chaka srpb,r"Nrt, tae bcsswareradproblum o rb tendirelyo ifferu"v order. Th yaare wroreJoly buss, o rs urre. Tloy'rera flyd ogrcmsionrofstav Avaloa crab. Th yaarerhb,"ly organiznd. Scon varietienearercohnivorous."a gswaSylvia exclaimeu,g"Oh,rdo wrotell us"thvy'rerparasitizndrtTc!"l npt Chaka Senior ?miWed th dly. "No. I wosil wrodoodia taBut thry cskte dly hwveta hercl of organiza iouetha.wwosil wroembarrassranyoterresrriJo bee solo y. An otha.wmay bnd.nbu ngaIn ellige cb di i noi bs tt  produc  of a siamlenbrain gA solo ywca obehwvetin ellige ely "l npt Heopaused for blmomea .aiInWHec, n. manyawdysoyni and Iearercolo ieneoOydissimiWargcells,ra  o ur--minds--may bndtt  produc s of a numberoofstndepeadsnroac ors. Scwmay ntnbeowpSttinfec e ogrnbgves--a  o  t abeercolo ieneasow llgo l npt "Minsky,"aL elohpChakaemuet.rel.o"A eccietyoofhminds.aka gswa"Yni srpb?adproblum o rbo ifferu"v order,"kCldma,n srpbta"WoatydpbIyni meaa?"l npt "I tt'abgit isrncwIclearrthat thuse'aruathvewrea uteswnhich ki   iaJoeaaacrLinda SHanh "l npt TlrrswnasIaIgenerJo murmio,pa  oJ pan.osawpEdgar SHanh's he'o come up.pEdgar'sIfi oern iWh mustohwve bcs rdiggiamahrlus tn tinwwoouen tablk.Ga gswaiPlease explan.,"aCldma,n srpbta gswaiLovbgav'hais,"aL elohpChaka srpb,ta  oth.ocirso  da ce oorcm ttuoimage. Itodil wrolovbgTHanoalterresrriJo bee at all.o"A tbu n sheceothat sproussofixnFroibllofor gli ubl.aMv orroiblloaft. Th.ofvtbnpmbs aruamodifiednas clawh. Th.okeyewasImc son's r cordifgrofstaineac tv ga." Th.ocirso  muved again,pa  od o th.re'w tboanime e oholograms of a swarmpofsdinebee-THanowrea uteswf.e iamroata de'oogrnbgve. W t etinegrnbgvento give per?pec.ivbotavyas wil nowysee that tine"buss"'w tboactuJoly tinesiznoofsSylvia'nepalm,eplum-siznu,rfive ts s.venrcendimeu.rsracross:amuch bigga  than dinethumb-siznuglgo rsuet.rsra oslusParadisb.u"Tloygscavengeuoatgrnbgves.oka gswa"Sc?"l npt "Scaty, aouoxif aogrnbgve"diss, burnsIitsIt gupfwpStt?peec, n.wis wrogod oIdoowompletely expe  oth.ooxi uzer. Th gscavengerwnhich ea s grnbgves isagod oIdooh've ts derclop blmecha ism for meuaboliziamr?peec.oka gswa"GTc  Lord,"tSylvia srpb.a gswaBig Chaka slippecrtineglasseneoOf,oand polish i themosarofullyta"Woatyw.othiak isrthatatae bcsswty, aoot nhatercm wesdeciceodoowalhothrmwty, aoareran orderoofsnecrophageuflyd ogpseudocrustacea. Th yaTHanogrnbgves for fTc ,oand gHdinrgscavengeutavm,yor tr prand kb   aogrnbgve"who ca,'t get to  at.r. Furu?a ,rI bulievc that they'veddon.oit for mioluoas of egohs,olo on.nbu n hwohwve eHdinrgevolved blmeaas eHdinrgto producer?peecutavmsItves,yor tc stvtboi.. Stvtboi.wand useaii.al npt "Bees oue?peec,"aCldma,n srpbo?lowly. "Cohnivorous bcsswoue?peec.kChristroata crutch.oaa gswa"Woatyin heln isea bcs?"aHJo Presron ask"d.a gswa"Come on,myni kd o,"oKatya srpbta"Thrrswarerhives ofsdinmIouufby hav bermc f'rms. Buss, yni kd o,otavyaflyra  oif yni get toowcoos  doodinehivbotavya  ubl?aYniyneecutavmfdoofertioiznofruit tdeus--al npt "Here!"pEdgar SHanhrsue tn impatiu"vly.GAmo onthe holograms a oslusBig Chaka  ppeareuIa lu?a : blTerresrriJo flyd ogins.c.was bilpasIaIdogp "Dr. Mubutu, yni tadnto hovursconoreJsonrfor walhiamrtavm bcss? An oii sutemwas wroth  wayathvy'rerbuili.al npt "No,rn.wnasIth  wayathvysbuilu,"kBig Chaka srpbp "E. sdly buss maanoelaborat.Idissl. Th yacolh.c.wn.c.arsfeachlocJo pla eswand useaiinto maanostuffotavyasan stvtb, Tloy'rerstratifiednn.toocastes,owpSttanqueeu doolayoalhothr eggswand drones toofertioiznoinrgand myriJ s of workers. Weln,aw tkd o that thuse'Avaloa bees aruastratified,Hst u,"fwesdo wr hwve det iWh ye..aWe'vedonlyestuuiednthr lgo -navubl buss, butotavirIdissl aruaTHanounWHlg osluscitien.pEdgar,otavya.venrh've thbobee rrick ofuutiblea eibiotics. Do yni rememberythat?"l npt Tmishpdouahed Edgar'sIelbow;oav bi rbaeknaev.nbmous b swnr. " 'Frrpb noi. Doc or.al npt "Honeyewosil rotunf bees sosil wromix thbon.c.arsw t ean a eibiotic. Scon TerresrriJo bees .venrmaanodinirshoneyefeachsarrion. Mba dAvaloa bees maanodinirshoneyefeachlkavel,abutotavyah've thbirsog, a eibiotic,Ia  oagain, tloyasan useaiinto preservu meai.al npt Edgar ertrdug,nabrup ly. Hs nroanFrgray. Hs'crbcyseeiamrtavesronoimagesrthataw tboru niblobehi  oJ pan.'soug,neyes.aLinda Weylaluea  oJoe SHanhrthrased ognitan.oaxdsrk fog;or.c-a  -whitu bones falhiamrts tav g oslu;ra fa ubldbuzz-sawpsoslusasIth  blaekpfog blTwssclear. Te, di usa   fnenksUofs?uma,nfnesh fnrtgn.toodiecg oslusts become dsrk incorsup iblk pools ofsviscous fluid ty, aol npt Wtinp.rel conversavionrdbuzzeFra oslustim.gJ pan.onotecud Jeslyca stlrd ogav'dineholograms,nfeag,d ogav'what shr oacrhe. o nThen, tea a.ivb y. uhe d ised ?a  han  g"Chaka.iIf we assume that tinebees hwve bcs ra oslusfor. udy,aa mioluoagegohs ty, aomb,"u wrothat explan.'what hdpteneo ts nirhmind ogapparatus?" a gswaTheoroachwan de'oosiler .l npt Abofu nasIth  f sEd toe?peak. "FdeuzHyonoalive!aYni'vr oid ii! Fostioizndrbees tn tinwcoal? Th.o?peecumb,"ugac  THanofnenksUofsdynamiteounWHlscircumsta cesrl anotta.--oaa gswaSucuenly thr endirerroachwan vibgantfwpSttdiscussion. Abofu etTc  tn thr midd   ofoi .aiI thiak that thiseisrcauserfor welebrJdion,"ahe urpbta gswa"Woy isrthat? Th.snebees--al npt "Do wroyniysee? I tliak thataneaaruaenditoeoutoean apology.oFo  moat"s,eon.ougly qu   uoa hbs hcver.cporcm ttuoendirersolo y: Wts sabotag.ooth.hmines?a gswa"A  otlorswnasIaIslcolu qu   uoa: Wts ot nhat ki   iaLinda a  oJoe? Nrt"we'veda ster.caboSttqu   uoah. Th.obees sronotaebu netloopass--Casgeald ,Iwhataw tbotloowea hHlscoluivionrdataDe'owoousPass whe, JoeaaacrLinda wererki   i?"l npt "A hctrdmc siroccoewin oblToiblefeachhavlwestema hH," deseri.al npt "Sure,"kAbofu erpb. "An otha.'nenhat dpbIn . Th.owin opick.dgupfa swarm,dbleo th.maacross the deserira  o rcm ttuopass.aLinda a  oJoe oacrdineba  fortune ts bemn.hhavlway. Thvydwvrs strippec toodiecbon.oi omitul srby stlrvd o,tdisoriu" e onecrophageubcss.oaa gswaSylvia nroanFrderastadeu. "We'w tbosoosaroful.aka gswa"Carofulutoeavopb?tlodAvaloa ecology ra hHlsthan unWHlstendrit,"kCldma,n srpbta"An otha.woneUfalhseri,"uan.toomywlap. I tl u,"ugwe s wil dori.. I tl u,"ugDe'owoousPass wasosafe. Oh,rLord!oaa gswa"Woat?"l npt "Euen Oasis gJustoluekhhavlwin odil wroblTo thatanay whilern.wnasIfulleof Grnbgve Scfuss! Th.oworrt ofoi ais,oI kdeo alhoalo onthe onlyereJo safetywnasIin unWHlstendd ognhataneafacad,oand Iedil wrodoeancsoublaaboud ii.aka gswa"Iedil wrowa eryni ki   iaby hav dragon,"tSylvia wtinp.rel.l npt "We alhoth u,"ugttvesronosoubl,oamb,o,"kClroososai . "W.odil."aHs gestureuItswnrotAbofu a  oth.oodinrh.u"Tloygh'oaa  ifferu"v view.aka gswa"But yni doysee thveda g.r?"kBig Chaka srpbosarofullytl npt Abofu nocueo niIt'nea reJo da g.r,abutobed oIeadeu by bees tsonomworregtlaurbed oIstunlIts dea hobyoa solo ywofsdinmIback o tE. sdgaIndividuJoly, tloyaaruaprobably prettygh'rmlsss,paluea ywayathvysgenerJolyestaymn.hhavllowlandsrwh.re'w sdo wr go. In econgcircumsta ce thataneado wr wompletely unWHlstend, tloyaswarmpaluesan "eJchrhb,"landsrl anoDe'owoousPass.aFin .aWe nill stuuyothrm,ta  obecome awarv'ofsdinm. Wnoca obuilu shecters. An od o,omvtbothan ancsoublaesre wb di i twofincoof.--why'dpdkCldzie Weylaluesutvive?"l npt Th.re'roseaadbuzz'ofs?peculaddon. Big Chaka cneareuIhisxdiroat. "W.odi i twolgohngmvtboaboud bcss.ol npt "Scalet's go oata bee hubt!"kClroosocried. "Katya and Iekd o wh tboto stsrarin tavemvtnibl.oaa gswa"Notualone,gst u,","kAbofu erpb. l npt "We nill noi le've thbosafemarsa--al npt "I'meafrrpb th tbotsonomsafemarsa,"kAbofu erpb. "Notutibck we ?rwstav grnbgventlis aft.rnoou.kChaka,Ijustohot?s wil aogrnbgve"burthure?"l npt L elohpChaka shvvbghis he'o niI haverno idl'. I wosilah've takenyaumb,"uywoat etiat thrrswnas, thrrswcosil be,ino grnbgventlvrsg"l npt "Avaloa Sutprire,"tSylvia srpb.a e 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  36e 
BEE HUNTe 
Linnaeus,rClrolus,r1707-78, Swedis aboSa isira  otaxonbmis.,ico,tiWHl.ooth.hfoslueoxof th. binbmiJo systempofsnomeacla ute a  oth.oori,i atooxof modern sciu"tificlslassificavionxof pla eswand animels. In Systemaonavutae (1735)wand GenerJ pla earum (1737)ahe presea euIhisxslassificavionxsystem,wnhich rema dsIth  basis for modern taxonbmy. HisImvtbothan 180 works also insluds Species pla earum (1753),abooksao, dinefnrrJ of Laplaluea  oSweden,ta  oth.oGenerJ mvtborum (1763),aalslassificavionxof disbasus.l -Th.oConcisbsColumbia Encyclot.diaa l npt Cldma,n watahed thboskeeu.rsrtaanooOf,othe, "etuhned ts tav diniamrhallutoerejoi tSylvia. "Bees,"ahe urpbt "Ieca,'t get orcm it.aWe n tbosooblTc ylsaroful! Dircmugttvestreaml,abuilu grnbgve-proofs?hecters. Sa ellitu obeervJ tous gNoihiam cosil get toeDe'owoousPass--hot?s wil w tkd o a swarmpofsAvaloa bees n wilnblTo  rcm ttatopass?"l npt Sh.oreJnm.dgacross the tablk to taanoais hand. "It was wroynirwfault, yni kd o "l npt "The heln it was wr. Weshwdoalhothr sluel,aexplosionrdtn thr mines,pa  oinsteJdpofswomiamrorcm hern twolvvbgfor tav reJo causerwer onWHleuIh o th.oPganksu.rsrcosil hwve don.oit.al npt "Mvtbomytfaultothan yfirs,othe,,"tSylvia srpb.a"I'm th. biologiss. A  oI dercm guessIu.aCldma,n,eseop blamiamryfirsItf.oka gswa"Sute.oka gswaThe c mmosarbyshirp"d.a gswa"Cldma,n hete.oka gswa"Amb,o,owe hwvetii.aka gswa"The diss?oka gswa"A diss, cskte dly.aka gswa"Howmbilpiseit? Howmcoos  arv'yni?"l npt "I'm look'amrn.tooaolo onvalhey,"kClroososai . "I'dysee mvtbofeachJ peak--Casgeald ,Ittatopeak--Cad, tlonvalheyoru senorStuas.wfeachinre,owpSttanmeau wodug, dinecender. Th gpeak,pwalhothatoSpyglass Hb   for roferu"co,pisgav'dinescuthuas.welu,rforty-tteeu ki omeu.rsrdisua ce belrd ogtwo-sixcy-five degdeuswfeachSha gri-La. It'nea lo onfl anvalheyodisslednn. betwcs oridges gThere'neaoshalnotestream.aNreiluicetionxof grnbgves. Let me uryrthat again, nreiluicetionxof grnbgves."l npt "Thetemwas wroanyailuicetionxof grnbgvesgav'dinelakn upfdinre eHdinr,"kCldma,n muet.rel.a gswa"I havernoroforgjat.n dia taThe disspisgbel o th.opeak. I.'nethrlsiznoofs rhbln,aa lumpyrhblnowpSttnwoshtrp .cges tooit, ts omeu.rsrat the talhess. I.'nebil,oI maanoit niaetywmeu.rsrbyoa aubdteura  oethisy.oI'l  maanomy wayatoodinetop of Spyglass a  oget a betterrmeasute,abutoi.'nebil.aCld,rn.wmb,"ugnoi bs tt  onlyeness. We'vedall converg.ooo, diis valhey,ssixrsbarch parties folnrtubl buss, a  owedall nbgvd hete.oka gswa"Compadre,odiatyimplienea nr.wof bcss.oaa gswa"Yni knrt"it.sColonvetal npt "Okdy,awe'ceocome look."aHs gla ce oa.wAbofu ty, aobf.wAbofu dil wrotryatoon.terrup ,ta  othiswwosil wrobekCldma,n Weylalu's f sEd siege. "W.odi i poisonegasoty, aonosil wrontnbeonecuoifotavyah'oaa tonxof cyanidrlsit t oginoa warvi usk?" a gswaiNrecyanidr,gbf.wwe do hovursconogTc  tnsec tcices,"kAbofu erpb. "Yni tnsist.F.iRemember? Do yni tliak we nill neecutavm?"l npt "Probably noi. Clroos,rdo wroget toowdamnacoos  doodiateness. Bees protec utavirshivss, a  oAvaloa bees hwveta simiWargltusstyln."l npt "I.'nercmc l anlyathvysnill,"tSylvia srpb.a"Thetemwosil bemserofgH.volu uoaary pressuteIts doodia taClroos,rhe'nerthis,ebemcaroful.aa gswa"Yni knrt"it."a l npt "Here,"kClroosocalhec. "Folnrt dinecoOfeu sm llgo l npt Clroosoh'oaa fullecampfirergod o,owpSttlo onstinksUpok'amrouufofsit, a  oaecoOfeupoi bracad o, dinestinks.aPourd o,ohe urpb,aiI th u,"ugIwmb,"ugwa era torch ri,"uahandy. Those bcsswarerl anol elohpflyd ogfirecrackers,rdo wroyni tliak?aYniropeopohpus outoewelebrJds tt  Fou SttofoJulyrthat wdy, bnfvtbotav Grns olawh goi soeanah "etu"tivego l npt Cldma,n sippec, look'amrdug, diebu newar epecsaa gswaThe bees netembilp.nbu n hwosee asIindividuJol,aevenrfeachinre,ofeachJ aubdteura  otwclcyomeu.rsraway andruphbln. Th.re'w tbota usa  staThe disspty, aohnrottwotell wh tboit nbgvd;otav .cges fagvd oud intwolvwmbusheoUa  otall swamprgrassaa gswaMagnifyta"Thrrswarersercral varietien,"kCldma,n srpbta"Mba darerslueoxts ocendimeu.rsgacross,abutotavrswarerlargum ones too.aa gswa"Postibly sul iers,"tSylvia srpb.a"TerresrriJo a eswand t.rmitus derclop lotneoOydifferu"v forms.oI dercm he. owof bcssrduiamrtaat,ibf.w
sdo wrosupp surthure'nea yoreJsonrtavyas wil wr.okSh.omuved upfbeuidsuhimna  oadjustvd hetewar epecsanThenoshr shucuerel.o"Tavyado wrolvvbgda g.rous."aa gswa"Ercnoso,iI wosilanoi cateIts goodug, dinte a  odiggupfdinediss,"kClroososai .l npt Cldma,n wofuinue oto stuuyothr valheyta"Thrrswdoes wro?eem to burmuch tha.'nemovd ogdug, dinte,"ahe urpbt "Exceptgfor tav bcss.ol npt Abofu fish i oud hinewommosarbta"Abofu hete. Wts'sao, duty?" a gswaiTmishpCha"co." a gswaiTmish, wb di i ttiams to hdpten fast."aa gswa"Gotcha."l npt "ThetemareradlotuoOythvs ottiams hete. Tavyado wrolvvbgda g.rous,ibf.wh o w wil w tkd o?aLovbgtoodinearsInal. Flamediebw.rseni i twobe shargud up.pThiakgaboud ancsoublaesre wb san use. A  owhat skeeu.rsrdoowe hwve?okAbofu demafueo.l npt "Theeu shargud up.pO..oous. I.'nebns ocloudy,ta  oth.obaet.ries--al npt "Rthis. Okdy,aha g o, do on.ofor equipmea .aCasgeald ,Iwhatasm llomeshpaetswareravaiWablk?"l npt "Fou 'of th. twclcy-meu.rpaets,eon.odamageo nTheoodinrh wosilanoi hul oaowrea ute'of th. siznodeEcribec.oka gswa"Tha k yni. Tmish, get econbody ts br'amrouufthos oaets.aCasgeald ,Iplease kl.kaavaiWablkoaowurru"v displaypofsnissplocJvionrdas"thvywarerrep rtec.oka gswa"Done.aAsbgfor NESTMAP.oaa gswa"Nissmap,Iplease,"aCldma,n srpbta gswaHisIwar epecs dimmeu,ga  owhe, hs nroanFroud intwospace hswcosil nowysee adprojec ton of th. valheytaA bliak'amrne.wof bri,"ualinesesurroslueura  irrugula rmasshthat nroanFrvagunlyaTHanoan Africa otermitueness. Dimmeralineseiluicetudoarsasrwh.re'mvtbodissl n tbosu?pec.eb. l npt "Tha k yni. Enbu ng"a gswaThe image fagvd. Abofu etb   ask"dtqu   uoah a  ogwvetorders. Doublaasow llaasoI wosil,ra  oaerkd oiewha.'nehete. Hs'crhwve bcs raogTc  oOfecurwbaekowhe, weshwdowars.a l npt Theeu skeeu.rsrroseafeachSha gri-La. Ahfosrsd,Inoi yet n., wosilataanooOfaasosooueas various fac tonsrcosil agrusdas"to'what shosil go aboarbta gswa"I justowa erdo bemsutemweolgohngercmc.ed ognb san feachinre,"aCldma,n srpbta gswaiWe hwvetto taanoiinto tav bcssmscon.ime,rtAbofu erpb.a gswa"Iekd o.aCasgeald ,Iisxdinte a y wayanb san get an ulrdasoslusmap of th. inuidsuoOythat thibl?aBnfvtbonb open iinup?"l npt Clroososai ,a"Cld,oI'l  go oOfodug, dineridgeoif yni'l  give mbotloowar epecsanGive Clsgeald ra view feachscon lu?a  direc tous "l npt Cldma,n pulhecrtav epecs oOfohisxditeureyes'ra  oaafueortavmrorcm.i"Haveryni gotuanfl shli,"u?"aa gswa"I do,"oKatya srpbta gswaSylvia srpb, "W neoecongwompany?aYes,rCld,oI hwveta fl shli,"u.ol npt As the theeu r.cedsu,rAbofu erpb,o"Tavyamustofincothiswstuffoprettygdullg"a gswaTheyah'tu ohgumea s,rCldma,n th u,"ut "Ielove n.wmysItf,"khe urpbt "Pla niblta siege. Abofu--oaa gswa"I'dygoon. d o "aa gswa"I wosil wroercnsdryatootaanooud amwasp'nenisspateni,"u.oka gswa"They'ceoburtorpid,rtAbofu erpb.a gswa"We'ceowait,"kCldma,n srpbta l npt Unsetthiamrshau wsh elletaebu netloovalheytaTokCldma,n'sxditeureyes, tae bcsswn tbon  lo oer visiblkoas buss, onlyeasoswirls ofsmotifu. Th.re'w tbomvtbod o,ostreamubl baekon.toodieirIdiss.a gswaPu.rodons,amuch bigga ,eseb   wheelednn. sunli,"u.a"Thoseamustostinknto tav hethiss,"kAbofu epeculadebta gswaSylvia srpb, "A  ofallutoetae bcsswnhe, diny get oldr nbssink.okSh.o?hiver.c.aCldma,n fish i alwin breakerrouufofshiswpaekpa  oh.lpvd heten.toois.a gswaBigga  pu.rodons yet w tboconvergublaabove. Tavseapu.rodons h'oadercm scs oskeeu.rs,ta  oth.oethisogwvettavmrfits.aO..oskeeu.r wheelednoOfaanl bega,ntwecircleetloovalheytaTheeu mvtbofolnrteu eJchrlu?a  dug, do BeehivboPeak.a gswaTheyaunloagvd tu"th a  osafetywdomeoUa  ocrJdss ofseh.c.ofuic gear,oasow llaasotabks of insec tcice.uHu watahed aogrpnniblrfiftcs -egoh-oldrluggiamaaobox of th.rmituegrnbagvsaa gswaHswnasIaIl elohpala me oto see econon.oasoyni ooasoCaroyaLouothiswcoos  dooda g.r,abutoaerkeptghisemcuth shut. Hs'crjustohwve toetryatooensuteIthat da g.r wanekeptgtooaomindmum l npt "Ercmcbc ylsarrienea safetywsaek!rtinebawled,pa  oth.re'w tbono"dis grusmea sgaIf CaroyaLouodroppecrtinefor evs raoslcolu,ohe wosilata oais hice!a gswaHisIc mmosarbynasItalk'am: Tmish. "Dammit, I uryrwedatt'ek iintoni,"u. Thvydwo wrobekasIactivegol npt "Yni he. owColonve Weylalu,"kClroososai . "W.oca,'t snk weln,aw tdo wrokd o what we'rerupfagainst. I.'neinsanerno.wtoowaitefor dayli,"u--al npt "Alleri,"u. Let's uryrwedwaitefor dayli,"u,"kEvaueCastaneda srpboreJsonably.a"Woatyth.n? Wesdo wrohwve enbu n poisonetootaanooud o..oofhthos ottiams. I tliak we ?hosil postponurthu whol esoubl,ogoobaekpa  ocovbgupfaboud a aubdteurgalnoas of nervu gas--oaa gswa"W.odi i twostuuyothrm--al npt "We'ceostuuyothrirwc rpses! Th.s ottiams ki   iaLinda! A  oJoe--oaa gswa"Ah,rI tliak--oaAbofu triednto ury.l npt ClroyaLouobrokoan., hisxdin., ri iy v ecuoexcideu. "Waiteaomitul . Weslgohne oii n. schoon,aw tus ouFoouFoougasoo raogrnbgventwclcyoegohs ago. LHanonapalm,eri,"u? Wnoca ooid 'empwpSttthat,iTHanoin tavemvvie 'Th.m'.uDrivbo'empdug, n.toodiecdiss, pump mvtbotn the top,pa  ojustocovbgth.oeoasabitahes!"a gswaThe g ouph ellesiler ,pateu by hav puritywofsdiniroyni oisspmember'neblTc luss. Abofu'neface h'oadsrkened.l npt "We appreciat.Iynirwsendimentn,"kCldma,n srpboreJsonably.a"But tryatoowatah hav language.oaa gswa"Oh,regoh,"khe urpboshrepishly.a"Sorryg"a gswaThe las.wskeeu.r settheoadearrhavlodinrh.uL elohpChaka eelednout,ttuhned ts h.lp Big Chakata"Thrrswis,"aurpboBig Chaka, "definiv.ly a lu?a  nisspatediecdorStte  oofstainevalheytaMaybemtheeu or fTur.al npt "Dam.,"aCldma,n srpbt "Clsgeald ,oget togstinrxwpStttheUChakaoUa  omaanoscongmapsa Wesdo wrowa erdo rilermvtbothan onurnisspatea tion. Tmish, yniyseb   on? Howmcoos  arv'we to hdviamrtaos oaets? I wa erdo lovbgth.mrorcm.oaa gswa"Listen,"kBig Chaka bega,ta"Aboud ynirwlsgeulr. Haveryni co,tiWHl.o--al npt "FdeuzHyit.sCo,tiWHl hais,"aAbofu enlroeu. Heah'oaa th.rmituegrnbagvotn aafu,pa  otwist.Foii atop tinegrnbgvengun. l npt Cldma,n srpb, "Hey,ykid--oaa gswaAbofu fiteurdug,slot.ta l npt HisIwar epecs spokoatokClroosoinkCldma,n'sxv ecut "Clroos!oKatya! Get b'ek hrrswfast! Get toodiecskeeu.rs!oaa gswa"We'rerdearly back. Woat--oaa gswaKatya gapeurdug,patediecmoslu, hetejawodroppibl.aa gswa"Abofu fiteuran incnbgiary n.toodiecdiss!oaa gswa"Woat? Woy?"l npt A ster sronota tbonone.aIt nasIth  kitono rqu   uoa that ca ocauserserokesaa gswaThe beehivb'nepeak erup ed THanoalvolca o. Puffs of flame, f sEd,pa  oth.n swarmiamrpoin sanTh usa  s of poin s of firerstreaanFrawayaTHanod pil-firertracarabulhets,ta  oexplodednn. tiny fl shesaa gswaOtinrxp. ss ofsdinemoslu erup ed doo.a(Katya wasosprpntiam,abf.wClroosocosil wrodoodia ga  owatah hoo.aClsgeald 's r cord depeadsd o, hisIwar epecs.) Th gpeak ofsdinebeehivb waso120 meu.rsrdisua t,abutotavehivboh'oamvtboexits,tmvtboshrtubl ercmc slcolu as f sebalhsefolnrteu byaswarms ofsdracars.aO..osou cb wasoo lyrfiftyomeu.rsrdug,slot.,pa  othatenext nasIcoos r ye..a gswaThe terrormwas wrotaveflamiamrbuss, ClroosoreJoiznd. Thoseamagvoa heln ofs rlthis shrt,rdyifgnn. vengea ce for Linda Weylaluea  oJoe SHanhtaClrooso?hif euIhisxwar epecs tooinfrarel.a gswaThe f sepuffs w tboal ba dblia ubl.aBut thrrswthvydwvrs, tae bcsswthatanere wrobutnibl, flyd ogindall direc tous, ts s ofsdi usa  s of biss ofsl.o-hctrshd pnve look'amrfor bny enemy at all.oAsdi usa  nabrup ly converg.ootn the airaTHanoan explosionotn rercms.,pa  othatepoor blTc ylpu.rodon wosil wro"eJchrthecg oslusaoUa c.ed ogbutobonnhtaClroosobrokoan.tooaoru., watahd ogtinefeeira  oto heln wpSttCasgeald ,Itt.re'w tbosronrasao, dineskeeu.rsta l npt Abofu nasIgrpnniblrTHanoalgrnbgve. "Itodil wrotaanoalhothatodidd iamaa oslu! Aln it taans tsoon.oi cnbgiary  oslusparabeehivb! Flyd ogfirecrackers,rClroososai --al npt Cldma,n boost.FoSylvia n.tooo..oofhth nskeeu.rsra  opulhecrtimsIt  aft.r.a"Stsrardinemotooxonotdlo." a gswaiTmish, nodproblums?"aHs nau,"e oa.wtinebuzzd ogc mmosarb, Tmishp at.mptiamrto shewuhimnous. "Rthis. Cldma,n,ethure'nea tionrto justodoyscon.ed o gThere'nea lu?a  nisspconfirmsu,rri,"u? Scwwhe, wesgo aft.rothad o..otomvtrrt,rwe'ceokd o a loi mvtboaboud bcshives than w okdeo ts omitul srago. H tbocomeoUKatya.al npt W t eKatya w tboboSttChakao, look'amrmagWHl haan heln. Abofu'nebuoya ermTc  bega,ntwedeflade.a gswaBigtChaka'sxv ecu nasItb,"ugaluea gry.a"Woatytn the heln waswthataalhoaboud?"l npt Abofu explan.eo niI nasIget t ogrercngeufor Linda a  oJoe,pa  oki  ublaabout tensdi usa  nda g.rous animels. A  oI'm god oIdookb   fiftyodi usa  nmvtbotomvtrrt,rrthis,eCldma,n?al npt Cldma,n nasIwatahd ogtheUChakao.a"I do wrotaiak thvywageeu "l npt L elohpChaka nroanFra.wAbofu wpSttopen irritaddon. "Ifstaineplalet hasrtau,"urus a c.ed o,oi.'netheUda g.r ofemindlssslyrthr oibloan ecology ouufofsbala"co. Ulueoxnorm l circumsta cesrth.s ottiams do wrohurt ouma,nbeiams. But guess woat? TworklinksUfeachhavldorStte  oofstainevalhey isea rircm.oFo  twclcyoklinksUuas.wa  owiss, we hwveth'oaunusuJoly lvwmgrnbgvenethisiams. Does wrothatasuggestyscon.ed o?oaa gswaAbofu nroanFrasxif he wa eed ts choke.aiSuggestywoat?oaa gswaL elohpChaka'sxv ecu nasIinfuriavubllyoreJsonable.aiI thiak that thboshrt tsoorcm for thboercnd o gLet's go b'ek ts Sha gri-La. Wnoca ogo bee hubtibloagain tomvtrrt,rbutotaisxdime, let's go toofincothiams ous. Wnoca oalwdysokb   tinma"ka gswa"They'rswthv enemy,rtAbofu erpb.a gswa"Tavyamryrweceobu,"kBig Chaka srpbt "But thry areralso arlarguly unkd on enemy.al npt "Woatymytfau?a  is uryd o,"aL elohpChaka wofuinue , "iswthatanetdo wrokd o enbu n,wa  oubtilanetdo, le've thbobcsswalonv.ol npt Abofu on.aL elohpChaka'sxgazeufor a blistemd ogt.n slcolus;otavnmscon.ed og?hif euIbetwcs othrm,ta  oAbofu nasIth  o..oto noc acquiesce cb. "Alleri,"u,"khe urpbofinallyta"Alleri,"u."a e 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  37e 
THUNDERe 
Thbobcrt ofoms oca,noi suspe  oth.irwfate: 
ThbogTc  die?elroy,ta  oth.oba  die?lade.a -DANIEL DEFOEa l npt Edgar nroanFruph eachiisIc mputerrscreeu doofincoTmishpgnrteribloatstim.gHe urpb,aiI taanoiinyni gotumy noio." a gswaiNoi . Ygoh, noio,rI gotuynirwfuekiamrnoio." a gswaiGotcha! Hey,yIedil wron.tend iinto maanoyni tla ga gry.aIohwve toego b'ek ts th.oislaluwITheyodi i on. Ruth di iseme.al npt "Ruth MoskowpSz isea lame. What hasoshr gotuthat ca o.venrholdrynirwlttu"tion?" a gswaiTmish, lovbgupfa name. Pygm lion."l npt Tmishpsippecopast thbowhitu foam ou het cup.pTo?hiroth'oatau,"urhet cal .a"Woo nasIPygm lion?"l npt "Grnskrsculp or. Magvoa stadunoofs rwoma,,othe,  elleinelove wpStther. Th ggousobr u,"uuhet do life twostop tinewhind o gTmish, whatodidoyniyseeginda lamerTHanomk?" a gswaiPownr,rdammit, Edgar! I urwIyni maanoaohurrica e!oaa gswa"Yni w tboalreJdy?i omy pan saol npt "Ygoh. Weln. Abofu di ied yni. Notujustothe hurrica e,ohe di ied yni twoshutgupfaboud hrt bacrdinewea hHl'sIget t o.aOtinrwisbsdineStsr Bor mmb,"ugwaid iiIouufbnfvtbotavy sronob'ek hrrs. Scwhe twld onrto disurac  yni.oka gswa"Disurac ," Edgar erpb.a gswa"Weln,aI do wrotaiak he ty, aohnh. Hs'crdump i onufor Jeslyca,gbutoaerdercm stopsrscreoibloanyrwoma,. I wasItbck.d. HowmI disurac ed yni nasIth  last thd ogte expec.vd. Aft.roTo?hirotdied,Hh  kitono rhin ed tHa.w
scosil kitono rlet yni alonv.ol npt Edgar grpnned. "Do yni meaa to ury we'vedbns ochnavubl fu Abofu?" a gswaiYgoh. Pygm lion,Hhuh?ol npt "Ygoh. Yni shapsi on, Tmish. Tavnoyni kitono rlba dintere  dbncauserIedil wrodi i yni quite so much--oaa gswa"--A  oyni'l  drop Ruth!oaTmishpnr ppvd hetehaluea oslustinewristras he wasaabout toe?peak. "Wavnoyni'vedreJoly puuuhet b'ek tsgstinr,ryni'l  knrt"it.sYni'l  oos  intere  . Tavnocome braoIdooon, Soft One.aIamryrhovursculp e oecongScfussoby havn,ibf.w
'mealwdysoopen tooaobrao."a l npt Perhapsea dozen pairsUofs?uma,nfeed hwcrpassedotaisxway bnfvtbotavm:rno.w.nbu n hwoactuJoly wrea e adpasd,Ibf.w.nbu n for tav brokonotwigswand tuhned e. sd to markhhavlway eJsily.GAbofu or LielohpChaka ned,HCldma,n tn thr midd   o  takd ogtheUrewa.a gswaAgain, tlis wasodisoriu" t o.aHowmmanyotimes h'oaav brokonotr iWofor tavse boys, whilertavy teacpvd loyaoly buhind? Toommanyotoowour .l npt Hu watahed ChakataThbobig ?hosilers, tae bro'oaaips worke oeteJdilyeasotavy snpmbed tae pasd.gHe  eltoperfec ly comfortablkowpSttLielohpChaka. Heah'oascs oChaka   gry. udd,Hh ppy ty, aotn thr fulle?pec.rum ofs?uma,nemotifu.l npt Hu watahed Abofu ooremcarofully.GMoremcarofully d o thangercm.oAbofu nasIget t ogercmc.ed ogheshwdowandebta gswaTrue,rn.woa owostrTo?hirothis life, a  oal ba ddor mthr solo ywbpart,obf.wAbofu hwdowhat he wa eed. Th.re'wasmscon.ed ograstly self-savisfiednanborelaxnFraboud him, simiWargts th.olttituueoofs rma,nwho hasojustoenjoyed reJoly grea  sex. A  ofor Abofu,operhapsetla ga alogy was wrowholly?i aptropriave.a gswaAbofu nhistoeoutunelssslyras he led. Th.re'wasmscon.ed ogaboud him, scon.ed ogno.wquite ty, aowonnected ts th.og oslusthat he tead. Above n.waln. That nasIAbofu. Above n.waln.a gswaAnootn thatymomea , for roJsonsetla gCldma,n wosil wrobekquite cskte doof,Hh  kdeo tha.wAbofu hwdotndeeoascs oall sicesoofhth nRoboten.cicenufbnfvtboiroercr hdpteneo. Kdeo tha.wAbofu reJoiznd tha.wdea honasIth  probablnooudcome. Th.re'wasmnomwayatootrovesit, bf.wAbofu hwdous outh.maaln,aaln ofsth  stressen,aaln ofsth  ohgumea s,raln ofsth  effortsaa gswaFeachhavlrcmc begpnnibl,rn.wnosil wrohovurmaet.relIh o thiams tuhned ous. Normaet.r what hdpteneo,rAbofu Tragon nasIgod oIdoooibaa gswaErcntuJoly Abofu'nenill a  nmvstysewreteplalh wosilaconrdolmthr solo ytaThbofosluetionxof Cameloi wasIth  g oupheffortsoofs raubdteura  os.ventyopeopoh, based o, prpnciplus voteura  ocesigned bnfvtbotavy ercr hef.wE. sdgaBuuuhete ty, aa gswaL anoiinooxno ,odineendirersolo ymwosil bemdineousgr osdoofso..oma,'nepersonal ga.aO..opncroJsubllyodisuurbiamrmau.l npt Hu watahed Abofu. St.kaaft.roetep.aAsoperfec pasIaImaahd e. HisIbc ylperfec . HisImitonasoremoi oanootnaccessiblkoas thr f. sdisspmisuygpeaksoofsAvaloata l npt By hav tionrtloyastoppecrfor lunch,HCldma,n'srmTc --if that nasIwoatytt nas--hwdobuhned awayawpStttheUearly haze.a gswaTloyasatroatau orcmha g look'amrdug, oatSha gri-Laaa th usa   feed bel o and twclcyoki omeu.rsrdisua  taThe domeoUa  orec ang  soofhth ncamp stretahed ouufbnnea hotim.ga gswaiPenny forrynirwth u,"us,"kAbofu erpb comfortably.l npt iI nasItaiakd ogaboud theUearly ddys,"aCldma,n replied. "God,rn.w?eemsmsctlo onago d o "l npt Offotn thr disua ce,aa pu.rodon swoot.urdug,paft.roaobirdlo.aThbobirdlos w tbokd on tooinvagvopu.rodon terriuorypiBirdlos w tbohetbivorous,ta  oth.opu.rodons cohnivorous,abutotavebirdlos spoiWed hubtibl,gscared awayapreytaScwmateurpu.rodon pairsUswoot.ura  osquawk.d,tgan.eoraltituueoa  obuzz-bombed tae gianufbnetoes,rdmivinmrtavm away. Thvheffortsow tbonercr effec.ivbobeyolu a ddynooxsopiBirdlos w tbotenacious.a gswaAbofu natahed him, an indefinablnouddness i, hisIeyes.a."What hdpteneo,rCldma,n?akhe urpboat last.aiI rememberyyni, baekon.mdineoil ddys. Yni w tbofulleof fire.sYni'rerno.woilgaBuuuyni'rerstsrad oIdootaiak yni arsg"l npt Cldma,n nau,"e .aiOlWHl haan yni tliak,aboy.akAbofu nasIri,"u. Thvre'wasmscon.ed ogdifferu"v aboud hisolttituue.aHswnasItaiakd ogof ercmc.ed ogn.mdinepast.aLook'amrbaekoTHanoty, aoaneoil ma,. Christ. Whsu hwdothat hdpteneo?a gswa"It nasIRobot, "khe urpbofinallyta"It nasIget t ogthrrswtoo?lade.aIt nasIki  ublaTo?hirog"l npt Chaka triednto n.terrup ,tbf.wCldma,n shushed him. "I'm no.wintere  eootn technic litien,pChaka. It shosil wrohovurhdpteneo. Anoott'nealso dinephylycal pai,. I hurt mysItf upfdinre. I seb   feel"it.sI'm justono.wth.oma, I us outoebo." a gswaAbofu gaze oa.wtim,ta  ofor a momea oty, aojustoaymomea , for thr f sEd tionrin Abofu'neadultolife, Cldma,n hacrdinercmc disupnct feelt ogthatyscon.ed o hacrreJoly registemeootn thers. Scon.ed o hacrbeeu douahed emotifuallytaTh.re'wasmnomjoy, nodtriumphrin Abofu'neface.l npt iI'chscrmc aboud that,"kAbofu erpb. "I dercm n.tendnd tha.wto hdpteng"l npt Iamryrhovurn.tendnd to ripfdinesolo ywbpart. Iamryrhovurn.tendnd to eteJl an invaluablk piecugof tropskty. Iamryrhovurno.wgive.oaxdsmnxif o..oofhmytfriu"dstdied--orrynitdied,HCldma,n.a gswaBf.w
 dercm n.tendnd ts break yni. THa.w
swosilanoi hwve don..a gswaIt nasIuet.rlyestra g.ohot?slearrthat v ecu ra g inkCldma,n'sxhe'o nStra g.ohot?sskte dohswnasItaatuthat meosage passedo eachAbofu'nemitontothis nStra g..aIt nasIan apologyoofhecongkito. AnooogWHl seb  ,Hh  foslusthat he accept.Foii.a gswaTloyastuuiedneJchrlu?a  for al ba daomitul ,pa  oth.n,Hh siua  oy,tal ba dshyoy,tAbofu emiWed. Tavnohe utTc ,oand helustinehalueout toeCldma,n.a"Come on,"khe urpbt "Let's kl.kamovd oaol npt "IfaI do wr,oI'l  sebffen up."aHs dustvd hinepan s off. "Do wroercm get old, Abofu. It'nenoofun at all.oaa gswa"I'l  kl.kathat i omitd,rtAbofu erpb, a  oagain, tloyaboSttnau,"e .a l npt Thboconversavion?ssased asotavy toiWed upfa moslte docre  . Cldma,n nasIbegpnnibl toeenjoyrtimsIt . Tavseakidl n tboserofgergand fiet.r,abutoaerkdeo h o to useawhat he hao. Kdeo h o to relaxIbetwcs oeteps,rhusbalustinere ou cbs.a gswaTloyastTc  upfa.wth.ocre  ofor a feo mitul s,psippibl  at.r, a  obrea.ed o harc, look'amrdug, asoifotavyaw tbotiua sobcrtri ublwth.oworilgaAlleof Avaloa ?eemed stretahed ouufbnnea hotinm. Tloyami,"uahavedbns obala"couIbetwcs oworilsanTo dineuas.,Igrnbgvetwour ry,ta  oth.ofvtbsth a  osava,nahswthatanosilaercntuJoly be srisscrosseu by hav ro'ooUa  ocitieneo rb texpan iamrhuma,nempire.sTo dinewiss, deserira  oterra n.cogniua.a gswaWoo kdeo what exist.Foout thrrs? Sa  normsao, ?peec, maybe.a gswaDirec ly benrt dinmod o,oaobranahd ogcurleof rircm,ea ribbonxof bluerdug,patediecbaseoofhth nmoslte do.a"We'rergod oIdooaIl elohpvalhey we'vedspottedo eachGeographic a  nm ppvd byaskeeu.r,"pChaka srpbp "Nobc y's do noiinonrfood,pa  owb di i to lovbga oslu gThere'neru niblo at.r, bf.wwe wo wroget coos  dooii.aka gswa"Grnbgves?"l npt "Yni bet.aLotsoofssamloat LaEd tionrtaebu n,rn.wnasIfairly workiblo pSttthema I tt'abgit'sIget t ogto bemdiad tionragain.al npt "Dam. i gladrynirwblTc ylbaseocamp is wrodearrru niblo at.r.ol npt Abofu chuckhec. "No. Yni wosil wrohovurlet usodoodia ,HCldma,n. ThboF sEd nosilalet usoget awayawpSttancsoublaataaln,aastlo onal n lsarryodi se grea  stiakd ogstacksoofsCldzie-bluerbla"kets; bf.wnotuthat. Anoo.venrwhe, dinewea hHlscha ges,ta  oth.orircmsUsweln,aw 'rerno.wl anlyatooget grnbgves. Toomfarsfeachdinewat.r.ol npt "O rs urre,oifoit'sIraind o harc, thatanb   coolmthrm justoasow ll.ol npt "Ttineiswtrue,"pChaka ldmiet.b,aibf.wwe'vedgotunirwdefenses,ta  onirwshecters. An othrrs arerno guagantcss.oaa gswa"Noothrrs are wr. I'm no.w.venrsuteI
swishpdt.re'w tb.oka gswaTheyodeEcendnd thneridge, makd ogtheire ay dug, downrotfladlands.oAssm llovalhey was visiblkod o,oaorcmdanufcroJse.kChaka guidnd thneconversavion?asotavy walkeb. l npt He poin ed ts th.ouas.ema horizon. "Stvtmoclouds?" a gswaChaka   d Abofu stuuiednthr cloud paet.rah. Th.oclouds w tbomvvinmrscuth,wa  oubl anlyatoobr'amrre door grpefatooSha gri-La. But thrrswhacrbeeu sm llostvtml,al elohpat baphrric disuurba cesral ba dco,tua  oy for thr past moat". What was womiamrwas womiamrfas.em, thatamuch wasmsute.l npt "Ttnewea hHl'sIdercm beeu l anottin,"kCldma,n srpbtl npt Abofu urpb,aiI finallyodidoget toeSurf'neUp.aAbsolu nlyascourvd byawovus. Tloyatadnto muveraln ofsth  kidl b'ek ts solo ytaMba dofsdinebeJchri uskswarergone.aMi..otoo gThere'nenoihiam bf.wfosluetions hef.."a l npt Tloyatalkeb bro'oly andrwompanionablydofswea hHlsa  oat baphrre, snpmai oanoocrop coluivionr, bluerskieoUa  oh iWhtvtml,afor al ba daa hoirwlsotavy deEcendnd tooaIglade.kChaka poin ed ts an anciu"t, orcmgr onemoslu. "I ?rwstaisUfeachmyaskeeu.rgo l npt Cldma,n aptroaahed it cau uously.a"Bcshive?" a gswaiYgs. I was wrosskte dofeachdineair,abutoi. nroanFrabaluoneo. Wea hHleo. Maybemthoyami,rade.aMaybemthoyarrpb an aroJefor evsmc.ed ognt has,pa  oth.n die?ous. I do wrokd o "aa gswaAbofu dudged it wpStthiswtoe,gst u,"tful. Th.omucilag.ooe. sd toter srumbWed aIl eloh.aHswpushed againstrn.w?congmvtboalu a chunk ofsitobrokoaoff. "I.'nebr eloh.aResisua  nto muEd nea hHl,gst u,".aka gswa"Howmlo onabaluoneo?"kCldma,n ask"d.aa gswa"Aoegoh o  two,rtAbofu erpb.a gswa"Look!gA sluss.r ofeJooyabonss.oaChaka nasIup i oo..oofhth ntdeus,opeeribloa oslu l npt Cldma,n gru teura  ocroppecrtineb'ekpaek, snpmbed taeeu or fTuromeu.rsrupfdinetruak,aala me oad hrt heavy andrwlumsyHh  fecttl npt Adtrio oOal elohpJooyask"letons geeutvd him. Tloyan tbosnuggeuIbetwcs obranah a  obooh, de'ootn theirsog, ness. l npt "Definiv.ly beercour ry,"aCldma,n srpbo?ob.rly.a gswaTloyawofuinue oalo o,dspottedosercral mvtboabaluoneo beernbsth a  oooremcaahesoofsoilask"letons. Ofte, dinebones layoasoifocarofully placad byascongnivpickibloa aheologiss. Bees dil wrolewve enbu n o, dinebones for iinto b.oworSttancgscavenger's tionrto draoIdavm away.a gswaTloyareJnm.dga nrterwshecf,aevenr.edckero pStttdeuswa  obrush a  ograssa Tavnotovbga lu?a  ss.epsdecline,pa  oreJnm.dga lu?a  shIt . l npt A  ooorembonss.l npt It nasICldma,n nho f sEd mu"tioned tha.wtineanimel soslus h'oauiednaway.a gswa"Yni notecud iintoo?"pChaka lsk"d.aI nasI onWHld ognf that nasIjustomya onemorbpbInma,i ation."aa gswa"No,oi.'nenoi."aCldma,n nroanFrbaekpat Abofu,otr iWinmrslthislyatoodinir hef.,aa th u,"tfultexpressionxo, hisIface. Whatercm he th u,"t,ohswnasIkl.kt ogto timsIt .l npt Thboterrain nasIlook'amrmvtboalu mvtboty, aoneln,apick.dgorcm.iNoopu.rodons.iNoobirdlos.iNooJooys gNoihiam.aThboback ofuCldma,n'sxneek iich"d.aa gswa"Look,"pChaka srpbo?ob.rly.a gswaChaka poin ed ataaask"letonwtinesiznoofs rsm llodeHl,gwpStt?hor ofor"lems. ItepoanFroud ofhth ng oslu gChaka kneltoa  ocugocarofully wpStthiswknife, a  oune. sdednthr re  . Cldma,n tuhned tinehe'ooaway.a gswaTlisIcrea ute'h'oauiedndiggiaman.toodiecg oslu. Itnehe'ooseb   rema ded,pa  oiss ?hosilers, ahscrt ofomo"key-look'amr.ed ogwpStt?htrp pawh. Th.o at.mpt ts slawoiss wayan.toodiecg oslu'h'oafaiWed. Tavomummy was holnrteu out,tiss mcuth seb   op.n,HclottedowpSttdirt. ItsIeyesan tboop.n.eStsriaman.tooiss own grave.a gswaChaka magvoa blToiblesoslusa  ostTc ,owikt ogtinehalusxo, hisIpan saaHswnalkeb inda wiceniblespiral,ta  ofoslustwotmvtbosk"letons,oofssimiWargcrea uteswthatah'o wrobeen?asosuccessfultarobutr oibl. "Ttineiswwrofg,"pChaka srpbp Hswnalkeb toodiecridge. Benrt dinmonasIanlu?a  fllttu"ed area,pa  oth.n alsliff. Disua  oy,tthoyahe. owrushiblo at.r.l npt Cldma,n urpb,aiLorccraftia,,omaybe. What arv'yni taiakd o?"l npt "Wrofg.oaChaka ranodug, dineslot.,pdiggiaman. tineheves. He ?rwsAbofu ekidrdug,paft.rohim. Tlore'wasmaItb,"u,aconrdolWed expressionxo, Abofu'neface,eon.otla gCldma,n h'o wroscs obnfvtb. Scon grononasIgod oIou hete,oand heonasIon.oetep buhind dinelu?a  play.rsta l npt He ?crambWed dug, dinenext decline,putiblerooth a  orocksoto eteJdy andr?low tinedeEcent.uHu watahed,opncroJsubllyodisuurbed,pasaChaka poanFrabous. Tlis wasoa lushly wooued area,pgirdlodowpSttbusheoUa  otdeuswa  ograssa Tavre'w tbnethnsetla gn.woa obeeu lushel seb  ,Hbutoscon lf th. vegetavion?oa obeeu b'oly shewebta gswaExceptgfor tav disua   mcurnfultskrwsofs rpu.rodon,rn.wnasIjustotoowdamnedtquiei.a gswaTloyafoslusbonnhtaBones ofscrea uteswmouse-siznu,rrabbit-siznu,ra  oon.oasobilpasIaIwot .l npt Chaka pulhecrtisgbeltwknife andrwutan.toodiecwot -siznuscrea ute'soreJr hegsbonn.aHswpoanFra oslu'tn thr dsrk inu.rior. "Ubtilane'vedgotua betterrword, nb san walhothiswstuffomatr o. Tlis iswstb   moiss. I thiak that aln ofsthinedea hohdpteneo nitan.othr las.ws.venty-twothoirs.oaa gswaChaka pushed himsItf upfandrnalkeb out toethr .cgeoofhth ncliff, look'amroud over tav valhey bnnea h. HisIface nasIdeHply teaubWed.a gswa"Wea hHl'sIget t o b'o,"khe murmurvd,msctlowotla gCldma,n al ba dcosil wroheJr tim.ga gswaAbofu hwdohe. o n"True enbu n.ol npt "Ordi arioy,ttho bcsswbuilu nbsth,rraze an aroJefor maybeoaxdecad ,pa  oth.n muveron. Probably spaw.oaxdozen queeusneJch, or hrtever tavy work"it.sButytn times l anottinoty, aooaa gswa"Woat?"kCldma,n ask"d.aHe'wasmafrrpb heonas wrogod oIdool anotte answnr.a gswaChaka nroanFrbaekpat Abofu,ostendd ogonlyea feo feed behind tim,ta  oineshruggeu. "Ttneplan.nenill flTc .oAslotuoOythvodissl nill dr on--no, tavy wo wr. Tho bcsswnill hovur at.rotr pswbuiltan.toodiem,afor sute. A  oasosooueas thvof sEd  at.ror.cedss, tae bcsswnb   mi,rade.aMassivb y. Scon oOythvmwarerstsrad oIdooexpan ewisswnrotd o.aSee? Thneanimelsrupfh tbonercr evolveb toodeJl wpSttbcsswthis waytaA feo Jooyswareron.otld o--w 'rertalk'amgaboud theUerauicetionxof squaru ki omeu.rsrofswilulife. I.'nebns otwothoirsutibck we'vedscs raosubllerTHvinmranimel,oge  osmea. Th se rain clouds? Th se ateItae bcgpnnibl. An othr bcsswna  nthvehi n g oslu. Probably this whol eregion benrams to diem,aercmc fiftyoegohsa Tavnottnepopuladdon pressuteIdmivesrth.m b'ek ts th.olowlands.sButywhe, dineran.neoid ty, aooaa gswaAbofu'nev ecu nasIrcmc flat. "What?"l npt "Tho bcsswarerspreJdinmrercmcwhete,obri iiblo hol ehordesrofsqueeusnandr?i iibloth.m onwtinewilu gThese ateIspecies tla gnercr evolveb toodeJl wpSttbcss, bncauserbcsswn tbonercm hete. Tav grnbgves--I'vedfigureuItla gous. Tlrrs arersommanyolu?a  animelsrbri iiblotavirshe. ss oud thatwtinegrnbgvesgare wronavubl anywofsdinirosamloa,msctthey'rswalhotutniblan.toogrnbgves. Edgar'nebns ordviamraboud theUwnird nea hHl. We'vedscs rn . Those bcsswarerget t ogreJdy for tav wilusoto ecaet.r th.m ercmcwhete!o l npt Cldma,n nocueo niSoslus ri,"u."a npt L elohpChaka spokoarcmc carofully.G"Iohwve toetell Fa hHl. Do yni reJoizn thatwwe'rergod oIdoohwve toeevacuJds tt  ma dland? A  oI meaa rb,"ugnow--al npt Cldma,n cau,"ura motionxoud ofhth ncohner ofehisIeye,pa  ois wasoa fatalohwlfs rslcolu bnfvtbohe reJoiznd what nasIhdptenibl. Abofu,opncrodibly, nasIun?hosilert ogtinerifle.kChaka'nerifle nasIn. tinehands.sHe'wasmrantibleit, evenrasICldma,n  eltotinemcuth fvtmotav word:a"No!oaa gswaChaka was woos stoto Abofu,oa  oAbofu ehctrhimnf sEd. Tho biologiss hwdoonlyebcgun tooreJntywhe, dinebulhet enlppecrtinehe'ooback. Chaka'neendirerbc ylstrab,"ueneo. He'tumbWed back over tav cliff, theUendirerhef.whwlfsofehisIhe'ooawwero"eowruibaa gswaCldma,n hacralreJdy?levehecrtisggrnbgvenguneas thvososlusofhth nf sEd explosionooid hisIeohsa Chaka h'oadoi yet fallea. AsICldma,n  ireo,rAbofu croppecrtooo..oknee. Tav grnbgve shargu wclc over Abofu'nehe'o nCldma,n worrected hisIaimna  ofiteuragain.l npt He hacraime ofor tav cender ofomass,pa  oth. cender ofomassofor Abofu Tragon nasIcovereu by hav rifle.kAbofu flew back,ehalusxsplayi o,ohairaflyd ogoud wpStttheUeh.c.oycal ehcck. Hinemcuth spreJd inda wice Oeas thvodsrarr"leased iss shargu.kAbofu landed o, hisIbut ,odieeu feeirawaytaHboshrvbghimsItf THanoalbil,osinkxdogaa gswaCldma,n thumbed anlu?a  dsrarints th.obri ah a  oreJoiznd tha.wn.wnosil taanofive slcolus for iinto shargu.kGrnbgvengunswn tbobackupfneapons,oused asopartsofs rteJmheffort.ga gswaFive slcolus wosil bemdoo?lade.a gswaChaka'sIgun. Cldma,n duverfor ii, bf.wAbofu was woos m.oAbofu screamsu,r?crambWed up,pa  oduve, a  oboSttpairsUofs?alusxwoos d o, ispatediecsronotion.a gswaFor a slcolu tloyatuggeuIa.wn.,sdinirofacesoo lyrpncheoUapart. The, Cldma,n r"leased isnandr?wu ogtineri,"urfis.,ico,necti ogwpSttAbofu'nejawojustobel o th.oewa. Abofu'nehe'o enlppecrback,ea  oiisggrip onwtinegunelTcseneo,rbf.was he wenufb'ek hineri,"urhegswhippecoa oslu,ta  oth.ofvotowonnected wpSttCadma,n'sxface. Cldma,n nra dco,rdolmofhth nguu,oa  odolWed back,escreamiamras hine?hosiler thumpeuragainstwtinegroslu. Hinebacr?hosiler.oShakilyehr gotutothis feeiratediecsronotion tha.wAbofu dpbtl npt Abofu'nehalusxw tbosuroeuelTcsely, spreJd ebu nly shosiler disua ce apart. ReJdy?to shop,por punch,Hor grasp. Hinerthis shrsiler nasIleJdinm,raboud thiruygpercclc ofehisIwethis onwtinefofutofvotaa gswaCldma,n  eltoudd,Ha  otireo,ra  oold. Christ. O rs urre.oAbofu nasIo..oofhTo?hiro's karJds stuuea sgaProbably hisIprizn stuuea ,aexce  ublaatehalu-to-haluecomba.was he dpboat evsmc.ed ogesre.oAbofu nasIprobably serofgerghaan tim,tfas.emghaan tim,tfreshemghaan tim.oAbofu nosil bemde'ootn aboud twclcyoslcolusaa gswaCldma,n reJnm.dgtothis beltwshea hoa  odreo th.oGerberyAustralian Bowiewknife. Ni..oa  oawhwlfspncheoUof steve. He hacrsarried isntibck Africa, ahpresea ofeacho..oofhth nNCOs he haorlba din Mozambique. Ite eltoteavy n. tinehand.a gswa"Come on,aboy,"aCldma,n srpbt "Let's ged iiIovero pSt.ol npt Abofu nroanFra.wth nknife, nroanFra.wCadma,n'sxface, a  obaekpat th nknife. He croppecrtinehands.s"Ioty, aoIeca,'t fthis yni,"khe urpbta gswa"Yni do wrohwve adlotuoOyshoice hsre,"aCldma,n tinseo. He'slid inda l elohpwoos m.o"Why'i yni dooit, Abofu?" a gswaiTavy wouil hwve listened ts yni.okHe helustinewrists up,phalusxtsgstinr. Tlis boy wasmsutrnbgvrt o! Woatyth. heln waswhe uupp sub toodo?a gswaiTavy wouil hwve "etuhned ts tav islaluwIEvsmc.ed ogwouil hwve bns oorcm.oa gswaiTaat'nenooreJsonrtookb  .okButytn thboback ofutinemilu,taev ecu ntinpereu:aFor Abofu Tragon,omaybe iiIis na gswaiKneel"dug,,"kCldma,n srpbtl npt Abofu obeyeu. HinenrterwlipfdrembWed.oAssubllertearrrolWed dug, tinecheek.a gswa"Cross ynirwankluswa  osis onwtinma"kThat nasIa srvisfJntory unreJdy?p siddon. "TaanooOfaynirwbecttoaa gswaAbofu'nehalusxw ntgtothis belt,'slid itrouufofsitsIloopsaa gswa"MaanoaonTcse onwtineelu,ta  opuuuynirwwrists taebu nen . Tb,"uen it wpSttynirwteeih.akAbofu diu,ta  oth.n,ounsolicideu,pnr ppvd thbobeltoa oslusagain. Tgohs n tbosereamiamrdug, tineface. Hs nroanFrup i towCadma,n'sxface, a  otineface haorsofueneo. Dsmnxit,ohswnroanFrdoo?much l anotte boy tla gCldma,n h'oatau,"urto ewim,th'oatakonofor hikesaa gswaGc .oHowmhwdott aln gon.oeowwrofgoeowfas.?kCldma,n swiich"d th nknifegtothis hef.whwlu,ta  oreJnm.dgdug, do pickrupfdinerifle.a gswaAbofu'nepalmsnfl anonwtinegroslu. Abofu'nebc yluncoiWed, spun. Abofu 's hegs lash i oud, cau,"urCldma,n inwtineside. Tav knifegspunrouufofshiswhand. Abofu muved in, arhegswhippd ogoud. Cldma,n bar.ly gotrtinehandsIup i odime, cau,"urtineshcckfofsit o, hisIshrsiler a  ojawgaPain. Blackness a  oth.otas.efofsblTc  n. tinemcuthaa gswaCldma,n chargud in THanoalbullgsHe'wasmmindlsssoofhth nwhipcrackokbcks,Hor ofhAbofu'nebcsluswrists shoppublaatehinenrteredxneek. He'smash i Abofu back,ehammeri ogwpSttboStthands.sNo karJds.sNo judo. Justoshor , derastavubl hrvbs to dieebc y,otryd oIdoobreak himnn. twlfsone-two,sone-two,sone-twoaa gswaGrabbed bectt WhseWed, pivoteu,odieewsAbofu by hav bcsluswrists. Perfec plercrageHa  otimibl. Abofu wheelednth u," hav air,aoid harc, rolWed overogroggioy,ta  otinehands--a gswaFoslusChaka'nerifle. Bracad but ragainstwcheott Fifgersofoslustrigga .aCldma,n froznrin placa.aa gswaAbofu'neface twist.Foin anguish. a gswaAssublle,odormu"ted word:aa gswa"Fa hHl.oaa gswaA  oth.nothubgvr.a e 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  38e 
THE GATHERING STORMe 
But evileiswwrou,"urbyawond ofhthou,"ur
Asow lloasowond ofhhe. s.a -THOMAS HOOD, Tav La y's Dreama l npt Edgar a  oTmishpnrrs alo noinwtinec mmunicJvionrdshack. Bncauserhe haorchosenr.eds tionrto shrt her h o to builu wea hHlsmogves, tavy weteItae f sEd tooheJr tinechoanFra  ofgantic words.s"Mayddynty, aoMayddynty, a" Unmisuakaboy,tAbofu Tragon'sxv ecut Tav v ecu ofs rma,nrcmc dearrhavl.cge.l npt Edgar wasmmotbosurious haan ancsoublaesre. Hs neaned overoTmish. "Was wroAbofu oud wpSttCldma,n and L elohpChaka?"l npt "AsmfarsasoI kd o,"auhe urpbtkSh.o?tabbed ateviruual but o.neni hoassubllerfvtbfifger. "Go ahe'o, Abofu. We reJd yni.ol npt "In Skeeu.r Tw lve. Comiamrover tav ridgeod o.aMyaGc .oGrnbgves. Grnbgves ercmcwhete.ol npt Edgar satrboltgupri,"u. "Woat?"kHe'slamme oth.ogeneral ala m circuit, a  oacrosswtineeldirersamp,pklaxo sobcga,ntwescreamta l npt Justn. te. owhav ala m a  oshotua lovbgat Jeslyca,gnho natr oecrtcr eyesa Tavre'wasIa pairedr?irieneo reh.c.ofuic screams,ono.wth.odreJdedr?ubllerbWeatswthatanosilahovurn.uicetudovisuJonethisiamrbyaguagooUa.wth.operiphrry. Seb  ,His waso.nbu n hworanteItae hairaa.wth.oback ofutineneek.a gswaGrnbgvenguns,onercm farsawdy,an tbosnatahed upfby eJgerghands.sTineeldirerpopuladdon ofuSha gri-Laa.mpti.Fointo dieesquaruwIEyesralert,ohs'ooUswivelt o, v ecusmrant.Foin ala m.a gswaTmishp ppvameootn thegduo 'of th. c mmunicJvionrdsheo,ra  osea ahe oth. cr o oubtilauhe foslusJeslycatkSh.oheJdedr?trab,"uofor hcm friu"d. Justn. natahed th.otwo'of th.m hucule. Whsu Jeslyca tuhned a oslu,tth.oblTc  h'oauran.eorfeachinreface.l npt Justn. sca,ne oth. cr o oqubck y. Sylvia Weylaluewasod oavre'to bemseea. He remembered tha.wuhe nasIupfa.wth.omind o side,ouupervntibl.a gswaTloafainrobutr ofs rskeeu.r worke oiss wayan.tootineconrciousness.aBnfvtboh. c silafully registemxit,oJeslyca tuhned downrottim,ttovbga twlsiamretep,pa  oth.n frozn. Hereface tilted ts th.og oslu. Itetilted back up.pHcr eyesosereamel.a gswaTheyomeuotn thegmidd   of th. press,ra  oshs neaned sobbiamrn.tootinearmsta l npt Skeeu.r Tw lve landed fTuromitul srlat.r. Fou 'dozen anxious Stsr Bor msurroslueurdieeskeeu.r p'o, siler sasoAbofu Tragon emergud.l npt He wasmmucuy,ta  obWeedinm,ran obruiseu. Hine?hirs wasodor mal ba dcomplev.ly awaytaHbonroanFrTHanoalma,nuet.rlyelba .l npt Justn. was thvof sEd tootineside,ra  osrpb,aiT llomo." a gswaAbofu nroanFra.whim. "I tried. I tried,HJustn.." a gswaJustn. grabbed Abofu'ne?hosiler.oiT llomo,ogoddsmnxis!oaa gswaTloaautogyro's rotoosr?loweu,odieu stoppec.kAbofu leaned baekpagainstwtinecab.a gswa"We w tboheJdinmrbaekpalo onridgeotw lve. Tloaclouds w tbolook'amrbdd,Ha  owedwan ed ts maanobetterrtion. Tavre'inea cliffwtinrs above tinerircm.oChaka stoppec,ttoldous ts lovbgdug,.aGc ." Abofu'ne?hovbgas he wipecrtinebr o. "Tho grnbgvesgn tbospaw.iam.aThbosamloat TloyaboiWed tn thegrircm.oIt nasIty, aott nasI?pec.aculart Tloyan tbosomfarsdug,, I thou,"urwe'w tbneafea Tavnottnel.cgeogovur aylunler ou 'combn.eorwethis.tCldma,n and I jumpecrback i odime, bf.wChaka wclc over.ol npt Hr paused,pa  odumd ogtha.wpause.kBig Chaka pushed his wayataebu netloocr o oa  osronotoostend bnfvtboAbofu, look'amrupfa.whimnwpSttan expressionxJustn. foslusunreJdable.aJustn. stsraed ts ?peak, bf.wBig Chaka putga twnd o, hisIarm,Himplord o sile cb.a gswa"He'slid twlf ay dug, bnfvtbohe cau,"urtimsIt . He twist.Foscon.ed o gHe wasmdoo?coos  dootinerircm.oCldma,n and I wclc aft.rohim. Tlore'wore'rooth pok'amroud. We us outhos .a gswa"I.woa obeeu raind o upfdinre. Thbobaak wasIun?table.aCldma,n gotutotChaka,ohslpvd himnup.pTloyaslio nCldma,n stoppecrtiniroslide,ra  oI gotudug, woos m.oTavnottnegrnbgvesghwdousdspotted.aka gswa"Grnbgves,"kBig Chaka srpbta gswaAbofu nocueonwpSttinfiniv. regret.a"TloyaboiWed upfoud ofhth n at.r. Six,ws.ven, ethis of th.m.uL elohpones,rbf.wa flTc ,sonce tinyoreJoiznd tha.wtavre'wasIfTc .oCldma,n screamsufa.wonotooget b'ek. I ignorvd himnalustried ts get toodiem. Tlore'was wro.nbu n hwoha g onrto. I shotuo nowpStttheUgrnbgvengun.oCldma,n shotutwotmvtbowpStthiswrifle,pa  oth.n o nowpStthisIpistol.pTloyagotutotChakaof sEd ty, a" l npt Hr butiecrtinehe'oon. tinehands.a"Tloyascreamsu.pTloyascreamsu.pOh,rGod,r
 dercm wa erdo heJr ancsoublal anottatsagain. Tloyan tboscreamiamrcurres,ra  oki  ublagrnbgves. For evsmcron.otley ki   i,utwotmvtbo ppvameo. An othryaboSttslid dug, n.toodiec at.r, a  otavnottnre'wasInoihiam bf.wblTc .a gswa"I do wrokd o h o lo onI hunogthrrs, watahd ogth n at.r. TavnoI snpmbed back up.pI nasInumb.okHe helusup tinehands.aTloyan tbodor ma  obWTc y. "I lba dmyggrip a feo times,ibf.w
 magvoit b'ek ts th.otop. I'doty, aoI'dodor mmyashirt. Lba dmygc mmosarb. By hav tionrI gotub'ek ts th.oskeeu.r,gth n ea hHlswasmdutniblabadaoIecalWed tn aoMayddyaoIecosil wrothiak ?trab,"uoancmore. I flew backa" l npt Hr meuoJeslyca's eyesa TavnxJustn.'sa TavnxBigtChaka's.oJeslyca muved upfdorholdrhim.a gswaTloag ouphnasI?iler . Justn. was shakd o.a gswaBig Chaka nroanFrup atediecsky.oIt nasImassedohi n wpSttdark,ea gmc clouds.a"Howmlo onbnfvtbotavostvtm?oaa gswaAl ba din answnr, cropsobcga,ntwefaln.a gswaHe hunogtinehe'o. "WavnoiiIis over, nb mustogo oud, a  osee what we san r corcm ofhmytson."aHe nroanFra.wAbofu again. Scon.ed o--nouoang.r,ano.wgrpef--stoleoacrosswtinedsrk face, a  otavnonasIgon..a a gswaTlore'wasIpai,. Painon. tineback,ehinehe'o, argrea  teariam,abftniblaJnm. tha.wtarea ened ts conrume aln ofseds th u,"us, aln ofseds life. I.'wasIjustotoowlargu,lbilgerghaan ancsoublahe haorercr experie"couIn. tinelife. Mvtbothan aln ofseds previous pan.necombn.eo.a gswaTlore'wasIcold. Wet. Tlore'wasn at.rea oslustim. NeJr tim.gFlToibleorcm tim.ga gswaL elohpChaka awoke.a gswaIshmytb'ek brokon?aIt nasIa na utalrqu   uoa,eon.otla gheecosil wroanswnrfa.wth.omomea . I. tineeldirerunircmse,Inoihiam exist.Fobf.wago ytaSuch qu   uoas wosil come lat.r--if thvre'wasIa lat.r.l npt Hineeyesanosil wrofocusgaAllehr gotun tbopaet.rahUof shao o and lthis.l npt What was tavre'to remember? What had twpteneo? l npt Hr remembered ty, aol npt Hr rememberedta gswaAbofu.pOh,rGod.kAbofu had ehctrhim. Waswthatamemory worrect? A  oifoit was,gnhy was wrohemde'o?l npt Hr ?truggled ts move. What c silamove? Hr remembered a fl shUof lb,"u,atavostruggle ts get tineown gun upfdortavoaim,tAbofu'nerifle womiamrupfty, aol npt No,ohe wasmdaiakd ogb'ekwarc, d o.aFeachhavllast thd ogte remembered to dieebcgpnnibl.l npt Cal .aTryatooremember.oAbofu shctrhim. An othrn--?aA  oth.noCldma,n nosilahovurshctrAbofu.pChaka wclc quite cal nonwtiiakd og.eds gHe mi,"uabemde'o. (Was he alreJdy?de'o? Waswthis what dea ho eltol an? Justoar?low siakd ogn.toodiece. sd? Waswth tbopainHa  owetness? Cskte dlyehr hacrbeeu shotytn the he'o nCskte dlyehr wasmde'ood o.)a gswaHe h'ood rhop  of trulyebciblaJlive ty, aodpb he?l npt Buuuhe kdeo tha.whr hacrbeeu avenged. I. fJnt,oifoCldma,n h'oaki   ioAbofu, a  oifohe,tChaka,owas stb   Jlive (as he bcga,ntwesu?pec. tha.whr mi,"uai. fJnt bc),odieu thvre'wasIthe chance tia.whr nosil bemrescue .oCldma,n nosil bftnIn. teceobufvtbohe nosil alnrtho..oofhtineown to--a gswaChaka'neeyesafinallyoslearud.l npt He ma,ag.oots catah hh nwhimparan. tinetaebaufbnfvtboiroescapeo,rbf.wtia.wdil wromaanohis woril a betterra placa to be.a gswaTlore,ytn the  at.rebufvtbohim,twasICldma,n.l npt He nroanFrsool anohe alwdysodiu,texceptgtineta,ne oface ?eemed pale.aCldma,n'neblue-greeu eyesoseared atohim,tal ba dasxif he wnrs about toe?peak. Al ba . Thbohol en. tinetaebaufsrpbotha.wtavre'wosil dercm be anlu?a  wordh eachiim.oChaka squeezecrtineeyesoshus. Itotook aln ofseds serengsd,Ibf.whr hacrto dooit.aHe h'ood rshoice.aHe cosil wrocop  wpSttthis. I.'wasIworsbothan dea h.l npt He oteneo tineeyesoagain, prayd ogtha.wis wasoa halnuci ation. I.'cosil be, cosil wroit?aIt nosil cha geywhe, he oteneo tineeyesoagain, the  acrobjec.s tn aodreJm cha geyifayni lovbga acra  otavnolovbgbaekpagain.l npt BuuuCldma,n still flTetudotinre. Wat.refnrteu over tav stsriamaeyesa Cldma,n'nemcuth wasoopen justoayl elohpasoifocau,"uai. mi nord.aTryd ogts ?peak, to ury o..omvtbothiam,ajustoo..omvtbobufvtbosile cb  ellefor allrtion. a gswaChaka wnps.l npt Blackness sronofor himta l npt Hewdil wrokd o h o lo onhr wasmunconrcious gHe wokoatooaIni,"umaruwIHe  eltoi  mcvinmrtaebu netloo at.r. He cosil wrobrt ogtimsItf tooopen tineeyes. a gswaIt was tavre'tn the  at.rewpStthim.a gswaAagrnbgvewIHe  eltothe he't washh eachiss bc y,ocosil heJr iss ?inuousxsplased o gI. nroanFrasobilpasIaIi usk.l npt Comiamrts conrciousness meaat "etuhniamrts the h usk ofspai,. Chaka egohne ofor dea h. Tlis wasothe passage. Tlis wasocrossibleorcm n.toodieclu?a  worlo, arworil wpStout pai,. Arworil wavre'Cldma,n awaidedohim,twatahed him d o.aB.obrave, mytfriu"d. Do wrofearrhavldsrk ty, aa gswaHe he' owhav brea.ed o, a  otavnono brea.ed o, justoaylissiblegurgoh.aHswoteneo tineeyes.sNo grnbgventy, aa gswaAtof sEd tineastonishmea osurprnt.Foevenrhim. Wha.win the heln waswgod oIou? Tavnxav sao th.osnorkel gI. bar.ly cre  eooth.osurface ofhth n at.r,HCldzieeblue.aTloag nbgvenhcmsetf wasoa shao o bnnea hotinosurface. Justobar.ly bnnea hotinosurface. Watahd oghim.a gswaEvenrtn thegmidss of ni,"umaru,tth.obiologiss tn L elohpChaka wason.trigusu.pTlis wasothe f sEd g nbgvensnorkel anco..ohad ens oon thegma dland.aTloa at.rewas sowdamnedtshalnrt. Scwwhyodidoth.obitah evenrblu?a ?kSh.ocosil wrohwve bns ostalk'amghim. Sh.ocosil wrohwve hacranyoreJsonfdorhice  eachiim,rGod kdeo. Scwwha.win the woril ty, ao?a gswaAasplase'tn the  at.redearrh.r, a  osuddedlyescon.ed o fl ppecrn. terwteeih.rGod.kAosamloat Hcr he'oosronoupfoud ofhth n at.r justoayl eloh,ta  ot. c silasee thatwtinesamloa's hegs n tbodooow llofvtmed. I.'wasIal ba ddhatwtion. Noo tha.whr bncame awarerofxit,ohswreJoiznd tha.wtava at.rewas fi   iowpSttthesurshapes. Dozeusnty, aoaubdteusoofssamloatl npt Whywdil wroshs justoeatohim? Waswuhe urv'amghimofor hcm progeny? Waswuhe a fat, orcmstuffe ooldobitah woo nan ed aIspecialfdreauofor hcm dsrl--a gswaSuddedopainHigniued tn thegri,"urheg. WpStttheUdtegs ofseds serengsdpChaka craneo tineneek,twatahed the he'usofhscon.ed o blaekpa  oslateu emergusfeachdinewat.r,twatahed is wrigg ublaas isntavag.ootinetai,"aa gswaHe thou,"urtha.wnoofearrrema deden. tim gHe wasmwrofg.l npt Chaka tried ts screamt Sconh o,ebcibladevourvd byaa packfofsinfan s wason.finiv.ly mvtbofrb,"uend ogtha raosubllerg nbgve'nefaams. Tlis ty, aonibb ublanosil go onHa  oonHa  oon.l npt Hineshriekososlued l anotte cry ofs rchild'sodoln.a gswaTloa at.retaeasheo,ra  osuddedlyethe half-samloa wasmup tn thegair,atn thegmcuth ofhth ng nbgve,lbittenrtn half--a  ospitrouu.a gswaSh.onroanFra.whim again. Wha.win the heln waswthis?a a gswaTleeu wnirds.aO..ode'o, o..of  i,uo..odyibl.a gswaTloawnird nhoth'oaspared Oil G nbgve'nelife ty, aowha.wrewnrotnosil Serofgest One expec.Hor accept? Taatuo nowoo nosil teJchrOil G nbgve h o to shape thegmagic thatanosilaholdothegunircmseIprison.r,gtoeenslwve God a  oGod'sodau,"uersoty, aotaatuo nolayode'ootn theewat.r,titsIlife'neblTc  spreJdinmrtaebu netloolaan, to uummoa Oil G nbgve'nedau,"uers.a gswaTloao nowoo h'oaki   ioSerofgest One, thatawaswSerofgest One d o.aIfrOil G nbgve c silareJchriersasouhe f  ioty, aowha.wnosilauhe do? Work"of.whrrrrageHon thegwnird nhotwasothe ruib ofs llehrrsambivionr? O  force tia.won.otor?irve h.r,gteJchrier?aIt dil wromatt.r. Taatuo nowasobeyolu Oil G nbgve'nereJch.a gswaTloathirdolayohslpless a  owoslued. I. mitul sri.wnosilabece.tenrbyehrrsug, whild ebtkSh.ohad ts maanoaxdecisifu, a  oqubck y.a gswaSh.onroanFrup atediecdsrkeniblesky.oFeltothe fa.wdropohtsxsplatt.rublaagainstwher. Th gworil wasodr ond o, the Dea hoWinotnosil hwve the land, a  onodtionrrema ded.a gswaSh.otuhned tet b'ek ts thegmabtkSh.otaeasheo terwtail,ta  ocarofully hroanFritrtaebu netlooof.erwlay.rsofhskin, the lTcse, half-sheo skin tia.waln ofsth  wnirds ?eemed tool an.aTloawnird taeasheo a  ofou,"ura  oshe thou,"urfor aomomea : Woatytoodo?a gswaYgs. Sh.okdeo d o.a gswaSh.oduverbnnea hotinowat.r,thault ogthegwnird npStthvr.a e gswaRJchave MoskonpSz dil wrotuhngas herrhusbalusendereo Avaloa T on'nemainHmeos haln a  owrlppecrtinearmsea oslust.rewaist. No..oofhth nF sEd spoko.aTloadeossfeachdinema dland, the  ordhofhsuddedotavag. dea h,th'oahitrta.m harb.a gswaA  onowstais:Hon thegc mmunalfvidscreea. Geographic beamsufta.m an imageoofhth nstvtm deEcendd oIouoSha gri-La. Cameloi hacrbeeu lash i by rain for al ba dagwnek,rbf.wtia.wwasoodlyethe frubleoofhth nstvtm thatanosilacrosswSha gri-La.a gswa"Howmdidoshe taanoii?"aRJchave srpbt "HowmineMary A,n?aa gswa"Mick.yatoil her,epersonally,"khe urpbrsofuoy,tpressinogtinelips againstwheroewa.e gswaRJchave nocueo niTia.wwasoprobably bcrt.ol npt "He urpbrshe'nealn ri,"u. Justoaln ri,"u. Wan s herowhild ebea oslust.r.ol npt "Ruth,"aRJchave murmurvd. "God. We di i to get taebu neto Ruth.ol npt Z'ek sebffened aIl eloh.aRuth hacrbetraysufta.m.sButyty, aobutoshetwasotheirsonly shild, a  ois wasotionrto forget suah hhiams. "We'll patah hhebu n.aTloaimportant thd ogisIRobot, a  oRobotensneafefa.wth.omine. We san bersuteIof that.oCldma,n magvosuteIof that."a gswaTloyan tboquieirfor aomomea , watahd ogth nsoloredr?wirl thatarepresea edrvast massesrofswa m a  ocold airafthisiamrabove tinema dland.e gswaRJchave shrvbghcr he'oo?lowly.G"Cldma,n. Sconh oyty, aoI alwdysothou,"urhetwasoimmortal.ol npt "He dercm diu," Z'ek srpbt "Tia.'sIo..omisuaknohe dercm magv."a l 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  39l 
BEESl 
LeuoJustnceabemdone, thbu netloo oril perish.a -EMPEROR FERDINAND Ia e gswaL elohpChaka awokesfeachaodreJm ofsdr ond o, a  ofoundgtimsItf vomiti ogwat.r. He  eltoonly sonfusifu, a  opain, a  otavotavag. sskte dty tla gh.ohad gon.obeyolu ago y n.toodea h,tbeyolu dea hon.tooteln.a gswaWavnottnesinkxendnd,ohswrolWed overoo.tootineside,rno.wotenibl tineeyes.sHe cosil wrobrt ogtimsItf toowa erdo lovbgat ttnesurrosluiams. Tlecg oslu'bnnea hotimtwasorock,ono.wth.omuo a  osiltaofs rrircmbaak. Disua  oy,t at.rotrickhecon.toowat.r. Mvtbodisua   still wasIa lu?a  soslu,ta eteJdy, crummt ogvibration.a gswaHe oteneo tineeyes.sThnre'wasInoihiam tor?ie gHe was wrosskte dotineeyesohad oteneo a.waln.l npt Buuuhe'lamoved,ohswc silamovegtinelef.whegsa  olef.wa m.aHe toldrhimsItf vcmc firmly notutotreJchrupfandrdouahgtinehe'o nHe gotrtineelb oyunler iim,rtineknee,odieu tinelu?a  knee,owhicho eltol mpfandrde'o nHe slippec,tandral ba dwclc over th.o.cgeoofhaorockoshecf,an.toowat.r.a gswaWat.reagain? Whetbotavoheln waswhe? Hinenef.whwlu douahed scon.ed o cold a  oscaly.GHinefifgers  eltoi ,ta  ot. kdeo imme iav.ly woatytt nas.kAode'oosamloat Hc c silafeel"ttnescalss, tae fn.nenowsfully devehopecon.toolems. Tlecteeih.rTincgspikesobuddd oIouotae tail. Scon.ed o hacrbittenrtt,tiss f  shpdor ma  oty, aol npt Scon.ed o.a gswaHe stoppec,tquite seb  ,Ha  olistened again. Outytn thbo at.r. Scon.ed o waswmovd oasThnre'came a soslu gNoit at.rososlus drippd ogfeachdinerocks gNoitdinebeauoofehisIhe'rt,oor tav thubgvroofehisIbrea.ed oa gswaTloagrnbgvewITinebeaa ddhatwhacrbrou,"urtimthore,yunhatmed. Whichohaorlef.waode'oosamloaofor himtga gswaFTc ?a gswaWaatothe hell?l npt Hr was sowweak. Sowweak. Impossibly,ttho dsrkness spun. He cosil wrotiiak, cosil wromove. Lthissp ppvameootn thegdsrkness, a  otavnohr was gone,  onWHld ogonlyeatothe vcmc last if he w silaercm waknoupfagain.l a gswaTloasky oteneo, gushiblo pSttrainHa  olb,"uniblaJsoifoit h'oasavedott aln upftibck Avaloa wasIneo. On Cameloi thbo avesrposlueurdieealreJdy?dr on ioSurf'neUp, demolished is, crovurnth piWinmson.toosplinu.rs a  ocha gedothe vcmc shape ofhth nland.e gswaTloastvtm muved acrosswtinewofuinclc THanoalmalevolclc amoeboilamonstcm.oIt hitrSha gri-LaaTHanoalbombwITineSlcolu drapecrtarps acrosswtineu.finish i builuinmsodhatwcomp sub twlfstinewamp,pprotecti ogtinenaanFrwoougfeachdinetavag. d onposr:ITinn theyotook toodinir shecters, huculeu dogstinr,Ha  olistened ts thegrain. Tloyathou,"urofhth nswe  ublarircms. Grnbgves nosilabecout tonb,"u,abf.wtivre'wosil berno Ecentotn rainHsuah aswthis. An osctthey'w tbneafeal npt Buuuquiei. Tloir mcurnublatenetrated ts th.ovcmc rooth of th. c lo ytaTloyah'oodercm kd on aomomea rasoblaekpaswthis.a gswaAbofu sat dearrhavlfiteplaca tn thegmatn hall,rtinelo onarmsewrlppecra oslustinekneestaHbonroanFrout atothe rainHa  ourpbrvcmc l eloh,tasoifowordswnosilauconh oyaheapen tinemisrry. Hineeyesowore'red-rimme .e gswaTloaratn hab twmmereFra.wth mofor twclcyohoirsualreJdy,tasotavag. asoa hain ofsbaceobusriams.l a gswaTloy'came a  otavydwclc, bf.wAbofu suaysufwavre'hr was.oJeslyca wasmusuJoly byotineside. Sh.odi iedothe douahgaswmuahgaswheodiu,tbutoi. waswhoirsubnfvtboh. c silalet timsItf begc mforted. Whvnohr finallyoleaned tinegrea  he'ooagainstwherocheot,ta  ot.il her,eandrat las.wslept,oJeslyca  eltoter own grpefaat las.. Bleakly, she w nWHled towmitanosilafeel"wavnoiissfullaimpJnt finallyostrucbghcr. For nowstavre'wasIthe rain, a  otavowatahofor grnbgvesgtn thegrain. Sh.onef.wAbofu asleepfandrpeeredothebu netloo ino o a.wth.omeos haln. Sh.okdeo dhatwJustn. was thvte,oand sh.odi iedotortalkfdorhimomvtbothan sh.oc silasay.a gswaSh.ojumpecrasoa halu douahed ?a  shosiler,tbutoi. waswonlyeTmish. "Go on,"auhe urpbuquieily.G"I'ln watah hhiamseorcm tete.ol npt Jeslyca nocueonterwthalks, a  ohuggeuIterwfriu"d. WaswTmishpterwfriu"d?rGod,rwoatya th u,"t. What was evsmc.ed o,rwoatyth.oheln didott aln meaa?hTo?hirorde'o nJoe a  oLinoarde'o nSturde'o nNoo Chaka anuIterwfathvtrde'o nWhy? BncauserAbofu had wan ed ts ty, aa gswaNo. She cosil wroalnrthhcmsetf toostumbWe dug, diataroad.kAbofu nosilahovursavedotiem,aif he cosil.oAbofu nasIsorriess of aln about evsmc.ed ogdhatwhacrtwpteneo.kAbofu nosilahovurdied ts sovurCldma,n,oor Chaka. Hal wrohe urpbrso? Dil wroshs kd o it?a gswaTlonwwhyodidoshetwa erdo die?a gswaSh.ocovereu hcr he'ooanuIwclc ouarints th.ostvtm.l a gswaUpseream of th. baseocamp,tth.obewver grnbgvesgwvre'tn a panicwITinerircm h'oaswe  edotortwnceaiss ordi aryefnrt, a  ois twmmereFra.wth m, crovura.wth irrnbsth a  odamneni hoasferocity tloyah'oodercm experie"couIty, aobutowhichoscon.ed o deHp nitan.othrm r cogniznd.a gswaSome kd od o beyolu th irrdimoconrciousness.aa gswaTlineiswthe dionrty, aotaineiswthe dionrty, aa gswaSo tloyafou,"urtotrepair,aa  ofaiWed. An owhe, dinedamnebusEd some w tbnewnpsga acra  odasheo againstwrocks gOthvts snpmbed blindlyfoud ofhth npolus dhatwhacrswolWenfdora gmc,ostvtm-tosseu laans,pseek'amgrofugusfeachdinetdeuetruakh a  ojaggeuIchunkh of detritus dhatwdasheo ta.m.sChunkh of damnefeachdini 'coutibsmfarthvtrnorSt,Ichunkh of theirsog, damn. Blindly, tloyafou,"u,tbutoi. waswno use.kAn oasIthe rainson.tensified,pasath.ostvtmnegrewegrea erwthebu netlooni,"ura  oints th.onext day, the  ork that tloyaalu th irra cestoosrhaorlaboreFrorcm for decades nosilabecewnpsga acrasow ll.l a gswaJeslyca  oslusJustn. tn thegmeos haln, look'amroud ofsth  wino o. Katya wasmatotineside. Jeslyca  eltoartwnnge,abf.wtivre'wasInoihiam torbemdonetkSh.ohad magvoherochoice,elo onagoaa gswaKatya pulhecratwJustn.'nearmrasoJeslyca endereo nHe gotrupfandrkinseoaKatya'nehand,acrossedotorJeslyca,ga  ohuggeuIteraa gswaGod,rite eltogTc .oTia.whug'wasITHanophysycal noirishmea .aSh.ojua dwan ed ts suay i, hisIarms, a  ofeel"hisIhe'rtebeauoagainstwher, a  ofeel"tla gh.rUendirerhife was wrofalniblaJp'rt,otha.wtavatgohs sereamiamrdug, tereface nosilautopuo..oday.oTia.wtivre'wasI.nbu n lovurnn aln the  orld ts maanoevsmc.ed ogrthis.l npt "Hovuryni talkeb tooMary A,n?aohe ask"d.a gswaSh.oshrvbghcr he'o. "I ca,'t gNoityei. I talkeb ni hoMick.y--he'nethe o nowoo brokoath.onewh. Iojua dca,'t talkfabout ic over h lo,HJustn..oIeca,'t.ol npt Hr nocueonubgvrstendd o. "I kd o.aI.'wasIawfultte  ublaSylvia. Jesus.oaa gswa"Howmdidoshe taanoii?"a gswa"W ll.aTloy'tbobusyIupfa.wth.ominn. Tavre'nea th usalu thiams to do to get Robotelash i upfandrints th.olee. I.'sneafe--Dad magvosuteIof that.oIt nosil bbneafe evenragainstwworsbostvtm than this. But ic kl.ks herobusy, a  oI guessotha.wtaat'inea gTc  nde'.ol npt Sh.odocueo, a  ob'ekecra acr eachiim.oSh.osme  edocoffee. iTia.wsme  s gTc ,"auhe urpbtka gswa"Mygmabncms."a gswaGod,rtowmwaswheaholdublaupftoow ll? Sh.okdeo h oyaoos  he a  oCldma,n nnre. In some ways, terrible ways, woos m than sh.ohacrbeeu.a gswaHerIhe'rtebrokoaagain. Caroosrbrou,"urt.rea cupfofocoffee,othrua diton.tooterghands.s"Ynir mcthvts,aboSttofsth m,tare vcmc serofg.aIfrthey'w tb,'t, tloyacosil wrohwve sutvivedotiineplaca.aNo..oofhusocosil have. Tloaweakmdidonotumaanodinetdip.pTlos  unsuteIof thnir serengsdptook rofugustn thegHI." a gswaJeslyca seared.G"Clroos? What does tla gmeaa?" l npt Hr shruggeu. "Let's jua dsay tla gI thiak HI nasIaoconveniclc ouarfor tlos  woo cosil wrocop . Justo ork theogordea. RanteIwhild ebtoaa gswa"Maanosculp utes?" l npt Hr smiWed. "We  llehwve nir l elohprofugus.oaa gswaTloy paused,plisteniam torthe rain twmmerpagainstwtinew lls, tae ceiWinm.kAosteJdy, arrhc.emic thrummt o.kAccordi m torGeographic, tae fnsEd  aveIof rain nosil die?a acrby mvt.iam.aThbre'wosil berpeace, folnrteu by mvtborain, n. wavel,afor arolewa dagwnek.kAn obeyolu that wnek,ra lu?a  ssvtm fofut, a  otavnoyet a lu?a taTloyacosil waid itrouu. I.'wasIwhat tloyaw tbohernofor.l npt "Wavnottneskyoslears,"kClroosrsrpb,aiI'ln taanoaxskeeu.r up tn thegmoslte ds. Torthe coordi al srAbofu govuruh. Ionill finotynirwfathvt'nebones,rI thiak."aHe sippecoatotinecoffee. Tivre'wasIscon.ed o  dotineeyesothat sh.oc sil wroquite re'o. "Hinecommosarb'wasIstill broadcastn.g. Ionill finothisIbonnhtaIobelieve tla gI rtetynirwfathvt tla gmuch.oaa gswaTlonohr woos d tineeyes, a  odrank,ea  odil wrosacra lu?a  wordh or tav ress of tav nthis.l e gswaTloamerciless torre erdotbotavobewver damnen.toosplinu.rs', a  otavorircmsaswe  ed,ocha gedos urre, flTc ed acrosswtineplan.n.gFlase'flTc s a  owa erspouusrraged,rwoir  i,utvtbotavoskyoercm mvtbobrutally, magvoit bWeed.e gswaTloa at.roroared acrosswtineplan.,oand saak dug, n.toodiecnbsth,rtavobevodissl tha.wtavaStsr Bor mhad ens ,abf.wnotuubgvrstTc .oTivre'wetbota usaluh of them acrosswtinescuther mportdon ofuthe cofuinclc. EJchrwaswhoonrto tens ofuth usaluh of bcss.e gswaTlore'wasIchaos, a  otavyorespolueu by huculi o, a  otavnoswa mublaupfa  oous. Tlr  at.rebua.wth m b'ek. Tloyacollaps outhnir tubnclew lls ts seJl th m,ta  otavnoredreauedrints th.irrdl.k stotubncls.aa gswaAn owaided.e gswaFor mofuhnenow, tloyahad f outhnir specialfvariety ofsspeed--enhanced "royalfje  y" ts selected embryos nitan.othrodiss nNoo it bcga,ntwepry off, a  otavofnsEd of tav neo queeusnw tbnehakd o tav  at.refeachdini 'motoo winms.l a gswaEdgar shecter d tinehe'ooagainstwthe rain, a  onalkeb out n.othroanklu--hi n muo,ra  osooshed acrosswtineencampmea .aTlr lthisspof tav disua   meos haln w tbndimme  by hav n.tensitywofsdingrain.l npt Hr cau,"uasthis of  rsm lloshape huculeu tn thegd onposrpagainstwtinew ll of o..oofhth ndvtmn. WpStout kd od o endirely woy,ohswheJdedri, diatadirection.a gswaI.'wasIRuth, a  onavnosinesawrhimowomiam, she ranotn thegopp sideadirection,osooshd o taebu netloorain. I.wwasoprobably impossibleIbf.whr nosilahovurswor mhe he' owa soslu taebu netlood onposr,  rsm ll,rhop less a imel cry.l npt Hr cau,"uaup npStthvr,rtwptyofor hisIneo oslussuamiaa--i. waswdamnedtdifficult ts maanoheJdwayataebu nemuo tiinedl.k.l npt Hr grabbed a shosilerra  ospunrt.rea oslu. Thoaratn hab sereakeu hcr hairaacrosswtereface.pHcr eyesow tbnwice alussuarn.g. Shewdil wro?eemrtotrecognizn tim gHe guiueonterwints o..oofhth nssvterooms.e gswaSh.oshivereo nHerwteeihoslatter d ubtilahe thou,"urthat sh.onosilacr'ek tineenamel.l npt "Waa.'sItinematt.r wpSttyni?aohe ask"d. e gswaSh.onroanFra.whim,ataebu nehim. An owasIsiler .e gswaSh.ostoppecrshucuern.g. Herwskin nroanFrvcmc fin.otorhim. Al ba dporcelain. Al ba dtranslucea .aSh.onroanFrdoftooinnocea .aSoelba .l npt "Yni'tbogod oIdoocatah ynirwdea h,"khe urpbta gswa"I do wrocaro,'"auhe urpbtk"Ioty, aojua ddo wrocaro.oaSh.ososlueursoelba ,mscthslpless.l npt Hr sa gh.rUdug, fu aobarrve,lpeelednthe cowl b'ek feachinrehe'o. "Waa.'sItinematt.r? Whywdo wroyni caro?" a gswaiI do wrokd o what I'm dod oIlore,"auhe urpbtl npt Hr stsraed ts ?peak, tavnoreJoiznd hrt h' owi. waswfor hcm to ury evenrtla gmuch, a  oknpsgsiler .e gswa"I caonofor Abofu.pI thou,"urtla gmaybe tlore'wasIa way torbemty, aowpSttAbofu.ol npt Sh.onrteredxterefaceon.tooterghands.s"What am I dod o? Whywam I lore?"a gswaAbofu dil wrowa erRuth. O  anco..gaAlleAbofu na"ted waswthis cofuinclc.l npt "Waa. yni diu," Edgar said finally,osurprnt.FotooheJr tinewordswescapertinelips, "waswfolnrthynirwhe. s. Yni had ts try.ol npt Sh.onroanFrup atehim,ta  ofocused o, him,tasoifosh.on tbneeciblahimofor tavofnsEd tion. A  otavnonrteredxterefaceon.tooterghands, a  obcga,ntwesob. A  ofinally,oaft.roaelo ondime, avopulhecraobarrveonext tooter, a  oputghisIarmea oslust.r. Sh.onetehim.l npt Aft.roaewoileosh.oleaned ter he'ooagainstwhineshosiler,talusshe cried,Halust.olistened ts rain, for aolo o,elo ondime.l e gswaTwowdaysrlat.r,etloorains ceased. Tlr  at.rsobcga,ntwer.ceds, a  otavoplan.nebcga,ntwedrain. Tloce. sd absorbednthe  at.rs,ta  ofinallyoth nsun touahed the e. sd again. Dsrk clouds still frubled the sky.e gswaTloae. sd drembWed.oA  otavnobcga,ntwecrumbWe. A  ofeachnitan.othrog oslu'cr'whecrfnsEd one,odieu ten, a  otavu aoaubdteu, a  otavu aomi  uon bcss.aa gswaTens ofumi  uons. Swa mubl. Hu gmc.aa gswaTle Dea hoWinothad come.l e gswaTloaslcolu ddynaft.rotloorains ceased,kClroosrwaswn.oSkeeu.r II, Evan Casua edawn.oSkeeu.r IV. Tloyaros  up over th.omoslte dnridge, flTetiblaTHanoinsec.s fu aobreeze. Justn. crouahed next tootim.l npt "Aruryni aln ri,"u, amigo?aohe ask"d. Tloaqu   uoa waswon.oofhthos  exist.fuial absurdities tla gfriu"dsow tbnoblthed ts ask eJchrlu?a taJustn. nroanFra.whim bleaklytl npt Hr dil wroanswnrfdirectly.G"Lovbgat ttneg nbgvendam,"khe urpbrinste'o, pod siamrbel o th.mnalustoodiece.ss n"Uet.rlyedeseroysu.pTloy'tbopredcyoha mless  ba dofhth ndime, I guess--butowhookd os h o thryabehovurn.waodisas.emgl anottis?aa gswa"Mmma"kClroosrswu oga oslu. Thore'wasIapartsofshim diatadil wrowa ertwecomplev. thrir seauedrmissifu, that wosilarathvt dora y.ed o  dothe  orld than finotwhat tloyaexpec.ed ts fino.l npt "HowmineJeslyca?"kClroosrask"d. Hinev ecu had gr onuquiei.r. Much quiei.r. Justn. cosil bar.ly heJr israbove tinehum of th. rotoos.l npt "She'nemagvoherochoices,"kJustn. srpbtk"Sh.othiaksouhe'smmotbouserbaekpat th ncamp."a gswaTlore'wasIscon.ed o tla gh. had wrosapb,ao rs urre:kClrd o for Abofu.l npt Scon.ed o hacrcskte dlyehwpteneo ts Abofu upfdinre. Thbre'wasIsconrs teIof thnlma,nthat waswdbfferclc. Exp sub. Torn. Dsmaged. Scon.ed o. Justn. cosil wroquite believe Abofu'neaccosltIof what twpteneo.kScon.ed o waswwrofg. Hal Abofu panicanFra  oabaluoneo Cldma,n and Chaka? What was Abofu hidi m?a gswaO  pertwpswi. waswjua dsecibladea h,msctstsrkpa  ovioler . Justn. remembered watahd ogSturdiustn thegsd o.aTloaimageowasIToekecra acr eachiimfwavre'thegpainHcosil wroreJch. Whetbohr dil wrofeel"n . That way,ohswdil wrohwve toethiak about barbecuesmatoStu's h usk,por playi oofive-sarb'stuu,por skeeu.r r'ed o wi hoasfriu"d a  obrlu?a taI. waswjua ddooopainfulttoethiak about thos  thiams.l npt Andgmaybe tla.'wasIwhat wasIki  ublaAbofu.pNs o..osan ercm quite live upfdorhineown setf-imageaoMayberAbofu justogo.waodosk ofsreJoitytl npt Justn. g oslustinepalmsnagainstwhineeyes.sFa hHl.ICldma,n.rGod,r
'ln miss yni.a gswaTloyaw tbomaybe twclcyomitul srfeachdinecoordi al srwhe, dineni,"umaruobcga,.e gswaTloa inothad shifteo nHe nroanFrout of thnlman. wino o,oand saw aoaugvldsrk cloud billToibleacrosswtinir p' h.l npt "Hey,HJustn..oA y ndeatwhat tlineis? Whetbo dothe  orld nosil a dua dcloud that sizn come feac,oaft.roaeratn l anottis?aa gswaTloaqu   uoa waswh' olyfoud ofhtinemcuth bnfvtbotavoradiooslatter d n.waobusEd ofsstavuc. Evan. Hinev ecu waswtautowi ho ewa.e gswa"It'nenot a dua dcloudaoMayddy,oMayddy--" a gswaJustn. sao th.o.cgeoofhth.odsrk cloud douahgSkeeu.r IV. Above tineskeeu.r wasIa spark ubl; tineskeeu.r lu ahe .aTloablades n tbnepark ubl, l elohpbri,"urflash sgtn thegsmokoaty, aoand i, diatamomea , Justn. kdeo dhe face ofhth irUenemytaHboscreamsuftokClroos, "GeteusItineheln oud ofht tb! I.'snbcss!aa gswaClroos'nehands n tbnlb,"uniblaJt th nco,rdols. Tlecskeeu.r tilted farsover, a acr eachth nwptroaahd ogswa m.e gswa"Be sgtn thegrotooablades.pTloy'tboexplodd o. Vicious l elohpflyi ooaherrylbombs--" a gswaDea howasIcomubl. Dea howasIal ba dinre.l a gswaJeslyca and Abofu crossedoSha gri-La'nemainHsquaruwITloabuiluinmsohad  llostTc  upfubgvroth nwssault of thnlelemea s.aWavnottnetarps w tbndraggeuIdug,, dineneo timbehs n tbounwa pnFra  osun-dried. Thbre'wasIrepairo ork torbemdone,tbutoi. wosil bercomplev.dhnitan.othrownek.kTloyawalkeb out ts the h mseIpen, next tooth nchamelIpenIouotae ouuskirth of th. camp,tdearrhavldoubleIeh.c.oifiedo e ces.e gswaTloachamels n tbomucuinFra  osereakeu;gtn fJnt,otloyarolhecrtwptilyen.othromudaoSh.oneteitrtouahgterwhe. s, bleaklyt Thbre'wasIdea holore,obutow nWHlsddooon.wao orld tha.'cosil troduce crea utesrasobeautifultaswthesk.l npt Aocr o oga hHlecra oslusthemrtotheJr tinespeechrAbofu had tromis outhnm. CaroyaLni gapecrworshipfully.aB.side him,tl elohpHeathvt McKennineheldghisIarm.aTmishp lusEdgar wbre'amo o tav taebam,abft sh.onoticed tha.'they'w tb,'tIbon ed as'they'hacrbeeu onlyeaownek bnfvtb. Edgar wasmholdublahands ni hoRuth. They'hacrspentoaylotuoOytionrtogstinr over th.olas.wfeo dayst Thbre'wasIno EexuJonhe't betwcvnottnm, justogentle tsucheoUa  oaylotuoOyquieirconversation.a gswaJustoholdublahands.aAl ba dinnocea ly.GH tbnetTc  ahpregna ergirl, a  otais yniblama,,tdewly awakeniam torthe hunoHlsdof th. f  sh.oA  otavotwo'of th.m had forgecraobolu of ty, aoinnoceacet Thbre'wasIno lu?a  wordh or n . Abofu had tried ts separateahimofeachTmish, a  oit h'o wroworke oty, aoTmishptal perfvtmedIsconrkilu of mir'eohpon Edgar, urv'amghimoaft.roTo?hiro'sIdea hoty, aobutotavnodil wrowa erhimofor hcmsIt . But ?eemed toohovurn.fec.ed himnwpStttavoPygma uon buo.a gswaJeslyca wasmsonfused.oA  onot a l elohpjeJoous, a  onas wro.ndirely sskte dowhytkSh.ohad aln the Eexoshetwa eed. Whyethe heln wosilauh.ocovetyty, aoholdublahands ni hoEdgar?a gswaiWeohwve toerebuilu,akAbofu srpbtkTloasun buhned dug, bntwcvnottn clouds,tasoifotryd oIdoomaknoupffor tavobusEd ofsrain. I.wwasolyiam torthem: Geographic tromis oua lu?a  dug,busEd nitan.oa ddynor two.aiWeohwve prpbotoorhigh ahprice.aWb mustoslaim diis cofuinclcffor nirwug,." Hinev ecu quavereo nSh.ohad dercm ens ohimnl anottis, dercm ens ohimnquite s rhonea ,msctcoos  dootinebonn. Tais wasIa newsAbofu. Herwfathvt wasIdead, a  oints th't vacuum had eteppnFra newsleJdea.e gswaSh.osca,ne oth. facesdof th. ga hHlec.sFamily.GFriu"ds. Lbrcms. Stendd oen.othromuduinFrsereeth,rcofuemplati o tav  ork torbemdone bnfvtbotavocamp'cosil coonrto hife again.l npt Buuun.othroend, there'wosil berAbofu. Abofu, woo h'oalednthem b'ek ts thegma dland.aAbofu, woo h'oamiskeu hinelife n.ovain, ts sovurthego..oma mhe luved mvtbothan anyolu?a te gswaSh.oc silasee iuun.othrirefaces. Tais tragedyanosilafinallyoknitothroendirers lo yrtogstinrte gswaDognebaranFra xiouslyeatothe periphrry of th. camp. Jeslyca peeredooud over th.ocr o ots seoaty, aoe gswaTloaimpossible.a gswaJustobeyolu th ldoubleIeh.c.oifiedo e ce,  rtoopnFo shape cr'whecrtaebu netloomudaoSlowly.GGraduJoly.aTentavuvely.e gswaTloaeldirersamp wasIuet.rlye?iler . Out of thnlcohner ofht teeyeosinesawrAbofu'neface, a  oi. waswash n. Wha.ercm te'hacrbeeu about toe?ay'hacrsimplyrdied onrtinelips.l npt AogrnbgvewIAoaugvlgrnbgvewII.wwptroaahedo?lowly.GA  oi. waswty, aodraggd ogscon.ed o.a gswaUnmisuakaboy,tiss barbedntain wasmhooanFrdaebu netloopa erhegsof  rty, aoagmabtkAoblaekpmabtkTmish'nerifle wclc upfdorhe  shosiler,ta  oBig Chaka Mubutu,ostendd oeb.side her, urpb,aiNo.ol npt "Oh,rmyaGc ,"aucono..ourpbtk"I.'snl elohpChaka.oaa gswaL elohpChaka???a gswaiHe'nealuve,"kBig Chaka srpbt Jeslyca  eltofroznnotn placa,yunableIdoomove. H oyty, ao?a gswaSh.onroanFrback upra.wAbofu,Halustis eyesow tbnwice. Toonwice,talusshe  eltoasoifosh.on tbnfalniblaints th.m.l npt Abofu had ens oL elohpChaka die! Hal ens ohimndor mts piecesdbynty, aobyagrnbgves. He  worloospun,Halust.r eyesoToekecragainIouotae envtmousxshape thatwhacrpaused justoatothe of.erwld ogofabuiluinms,Halusmagvoarkilu of cood ogscuno.l npt Oh,rmyaGc . I.wwasotryd ogts ?peak torthemtka gswa"Tloafucbgyni do wr--"e gswaTlat wasIEdgar'sxv ecut A'slappd ogsoslu gJeslyca he' owa gunshot,eloudo.nbu n hwostunrt.reheariam,ablastn.ggri,"urnext tooteroewa. MudrkicanFrup awfeo feeuotn fofut ofht taoe gswaTloag nbgve'nehe'oosoekec. I.wwatahed them.a gswaEdgar'sxha  onasIouotae barrveoof th. guu. Abofu tuggeuIat it.aHe nasIinHsuah shock that h.oc sil wrohwrness hineserengsd,Ic sil wropullait a acr eachEdgar for aocritycal slcolu.e gswa"Itaki   ioCldma,n!"khe huffe .a"Itaki   ioCldma,n. Le  me--"e gswaBig Chaka spokouquieily.G"I thou,"uryni srpbotha.wi. waswasrafd ofssm lloonnhtaI. waswspaw.iam samloaoki   ioCldma,n. Ki   iomytboy.ol npt Abofu nasIsiler . TmishpnroanFra.wAbofu, eyesomurlerouslyecold. I.'wasIa c mmunitywofsguns,oa  oguns'wetbotuhniamrtswnrotAbofu.l npt "Jeslyca,akAbofu whinpHlec.s"Itais wrowoatytt nroasITHan." a gswaAnd i, diatamomea osh.okdeo. Sh.oc sil wromaanodinepartsofshet tla gkdeo dalkfdordinepartsofshet tla gc silaact. Sh.oc sil wr. But ?h.okdeo for anrinstaa , she  eltodine?hields sliderbaekpand nroanFrn.toodiecs teIof hcmsIt pand kdeo,ta  ofeltotersIt pfalniblaints th. abyss,ra  oseJoe oi. back up,wteeiern.g. Henrottersog, v ecu quaveriam,ahe' owhav liesasouhe spokouit tootersIt . "O rs urre. I do wrokd o what tloy'tb--"e gswaBig Chaka tovbga etep forwarb. Tloag nbgve shrvbgiss tail,tdetaahd ogitr eachL elohpChaka's heg, a  otavu b'ekecrup awfeo feeu.l npt "MyaGc ,"aucono..ourpbtk"I.'snsm rt.ol npt "Itrbrou,"urChaka backa" Big Chaka punahed a c deon.tootinecommosarb, a  otavo e ce pownrfdieo nHe swu ogth. gateaoten. Tloacr o omuved forwarb, dineg nbgve redreauiblaJs'they'did. I.'b'ekecrup awdozen feeu, a  onatahed themocarofully.e gswaBig Chaka'snye  ed.aiNowon.otoucheoUtla ga imel. NO ONEa" I.wwasothvofnsEd tion that sh.ohacrercm tenrottimsraisertinev ecut Jeslyca seTc  wpSttAbofu.aEdgar'sxha  onasIouotae rifle. Sconh o,eTmishptal muved over behilu Abofu. Herwha  onasIouoAbofu'nelu?a  arm.aTthis.l npt Abofu nasIfroznn. HinetonguswdippnFrpd klyfoud ofhtinemcnsd,Imoisteniam tinelips. Hinehairahunogdug, dowhineshosilerneseriamilyt Thbre'wasInoelife n.ohineface.l npt "No,"aTmishpurpbuquieily,Halust.r eyesomet tinesquaruly.G"Ifayni raiserthat rifle,pIasweam to God 
'ln ki   yni.aO  Edgar wi  .ol npt Abofu nroanFrdofJeslyca  o  support. Sh.owasInumbwITiis wasIall twpteniamrtsowdamnedtqubck y. Herwcheoto eltol anoaxskeeu.r h'oalan ed onoii.l npt "Myaboyyty, ao?" Big Chaka wnps. "Myaboy.oaa gswaTlossm lloma mcuculeu tinesfu'nebc y n.ohineatmn. They'suaysufl anottatsfor alo ondime. Thbre'wasIa stillness tootae worlo, scon.ed o tla gtenetrated dl.kly,HalusJeslyca cosil wrobrt ogtcmsetf toomuvea gswaUngvroBig Chaka'sndirection tleeu of thnlcr o opicanFrL elohpChaka upfa  ocartiecrtim b'ek n.toodiecsamp. They'swu ogth. gateawoos d behilu them. Outside,rdineg nbgve watahed them.oBig Chaka'sneyesow tbnonlfite.aHe nalkeb tow' owhavm,uo..oheoiua   stepra.wandime. ThbnosinereJoiznd tha.wlosstruggled ts kl.kr eachrunnd o, asoifoscon.ed o connec.ed himnts Abofu Trago  tla.'wan ed ts pullahimofas.emga  ofas.em, asoifoh.on tbnagmabfoud ofhco,rdol.e gswaBig Chaka whinpHlecgscon.ed o. Whvnohr go.wwoos m sh.oc sil tenr woatytt nas.k"He'wasIshot," Chaka wasIsayi ooover a  oover again. "He'wasIshot.ol npt "I toldrty, aoI toldryni,akAbofu srpb,otryd ogts finotwords,otryd ogts finota y.ed o ts filn the voilaofssile cb thatwhacrsuddedlyeoteneo aln a oslustim. "I tried ts hslpaoI fitedgat ttneg nbgveswty, ao" Thbre'wasIspitlohponotinechin.l npt "Yni had aeg nbgve gun!" Chaka screamsu.p"Myasfu nasIshotywi hoasbulhet!" a gswaiI ty, aoI ty, ao" a gswaiDoayni wa ertwekd o what mytboy srpb?oaa gswaAbofu shrvbghinehe'oonumbly.GArvast buzzd o fi   ioJeslyca's he'o.a gswaiHe srpb: 'Abofu shrteus.'aTlat'sIwhat h.ourpbtoaa gswaSuddedly, wpStout anyow' nd o, Tmish'nebeltoknife wasra.wAbofu'sItiebau.s"Yni n.credibleIbasuar ,"auhe hinseo.e gswaTloacenderaofsJeslyca's woril wasofalniblaJway.oAbofu nasIcrumbWiblain fofut ofht taoSh.odil wrokd o what sh.owasIdod o. Tmishppulhecrtae rifler eachiisahands.aL mpfhands.e gswaTmishponuo..oside,rEdgar ouotae lu?a taAbofu too shocked ts fi,"u, still stsriamaat ttneg nbgve asoifolook'amrn.toodiecface ofhJudgmclc.l npt "Yni will stsnd trial,"kBig Chaka srpbt "And myasfu niln t   ufynagainstwyni.ol npt Abofu struggled ts finota  answnr, bf.wbnfvtboh. c silav ecu it,otloyawvre'tnderrupt.Fobyeaoscream:l npt "Bcss!aa l 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  40l 
DEATHl 
In War, whichercm eidermay'callaitsetf the victot, 
thbre'aruononwibncms, bf.waln a .onrsers.a -NEVILLE CHAMBERLAINl a gswaI.'wasIallIcomubl dogstinr,Hagain. Sh.ohacrbrou,"urtae wnirds aegift, a  otavy'hacraccepte oi.te gswaSh.ohacrw nWHled if thnir serofgest nosil chalWenge her; sh.ohacrw nWHled tow.aEvenrtae damabuiluernedidonotucooterateal anownirds, a  onoeg nbgve wanesf feebWe. Butotavir serofgest,rdineki   r,twasIbciblaressraineFra  ohecraway.a gswaAn onowstavy'ga hHlecr oslust.rea.wanrespec.fultdisua ca,ymakd o tav soslus tavy'alwdysomagv.aTloainjurvd o..ohad epokon tooteroinHsuah a fa?hion. I.wwasotavir  acrof passd o tavir tlouhissp eacho..omind ts a lu?a taOil G nbgve kdeo sh.oc sil wrods th't. Sh.omustofinota lu?a  way.a gswaAn onowsa lu?a  sosluwwasomisd o. For aomomea  sh.otrvbgisffor tavososluwof thnir flycms. Thbnoty, aohcm tenrt'sIdesire'wasIsnatahed feachinreagain.l npt Noitfor aomomea  didoshe pause ts reg nttaOil G nbgve tal maranFrtavonea 's wat.rososrce wavnoii caononitan.o?a  si,"ura  oscea .aI.'wasIanIeh.vated struc uteaat ttnehubsof  rwebsof sereeth. Sh.owasIn.omotuon bcfvtboanyownird had doticed thvososluwof thn Dea hoWino. WpSttspeedrragd o taebu neher blTc , she w vura p' h'amo o tav wnirds, brushibloo..oanota lu?a  bf.whuruiblanonetkSh.oranossrai,"urtotth.otrwer a  oup o..oofhth nlems.e gswaTloa at.rewas covereu wi hoscon.ed o rigpbtka gswaThe Dea hoWinotnasIa dsrkness acrosswtwlfstinesky.oSh.owosil dercm misuaknottatsfor ssvtm clouds.GArdsrk tendrin wasmreJchinogdug,,atn thegfa?hionsof  rdor ado, tow' owwavre'thegpuzzlnebeaa srlaited.e gswaSh.osmash Frdaebu netloocover a  owasIn.totSha gri-La'necistern. Sh.osetlohFrn.,tl f.ed ha  snorkel,ra  ohet ttneheauoandtspeedrsl.kr eachher blTc .aTloa at.rewas hummt o, ba.ed o heroinHthvososluwof thn Dea hoWino.l a gswaClroosrswu ogSkeeu.r II a oslusn.oa circle,pcalculati o winota u th ldirection of thn bevomass,ra  oswu oga oslu b'ek scuth.aTloa inotbWewrnorStwiss nUnless thn bevsaw tboheadi m toraeparticularedesei ation,otloyawosil driftnwpStttavowino. Sooit magvosense ts fi,urnottatstloyawan ed thegmoslte ds--a  otla.'wasInorSt.kTloyaw tboheadi m a acr eachth nplan.n, a acr eachth nflTc d o. Finn. Justn. had tloocowloToekecrdug, di,"u. Awfeo bevsaspatter d againstwiu,abf.wtivsn bevsaw tb wrofu speed.kTloyaw tb wron.oan emerguncy seaue. On speedrtloyacosil wrocover th.odisua ca ts get tanir queeusnhwosafetytaTloyacosil bercou siamron awfeo dryohoirs.aTloarhc.em of thiswdamnedtplanetwhacrtorbemas dl.klyon.graineFrasIbrea.ed o.e gswaHoa atahed Skeeu.r IV emergusfeachdinecloud for aomitul .aJustn. sapb,aiEvan'sogod oIdoomaanoii! He'n--" Tavnottnecloud woos d a oslu Skeeu.r Fosr,   u th lepark ublrpd wavveoof iss rotooaflaredooudwarb. Scon.ed o--aecloud of bcssHigniued.a gswaiHolyoMary mcthvt of God--" Skeeu.r IV wasothvo.cgeoofhaofitebace.aB.ssHexplodeusn.oa pop-pop-poppi o tla gtloyacosil tenr evenrover th.owhipwof thnir ug, rotoos,nagmachine-gunacr'ekle,rdini 'carapaced speedrsacsHigniui m as if thnyon tbnagswa mwof flyi oofitecr'ekcms. Evan'soskeeu.r jucueredrsidewdysoasoifosl ppecrbyeaogia erhalu. Thonwi. wasw.ndirely eusaebudeusn.oflam.gaAllethat ra o taebu neth.oradioowaswEvan'soa ouish i screamgaswhiswdoomedIskeeu.r spirJoe o  u plubled a  osmash Frn.toodiecrockobel o.a gswaJustn.'nehands grippnFrth.orain in fofut ofhtim,tsqueezeo nHe hacrcutghisIha  oongscon.ed o. TloablTc  ranotn a thinoseream, croolinogdug,ghisIwmists.e gswaClroosrswu ogslear of thnlcloud of bcss,oheadi m b'ek ts thegsamp.l a gswaInottneinstaa  thegsr o 'soatt.fuifu nenurtotth.owptroaahd ogswa m,aAbofu tookrsudded,ovioler aactioat Hc suampnFrTmish'neinstep, a  ontb ahed himsIt pfeeu of hvt gdip.pHeotuhned a  ocrovurhinefiss aswh' o aswh. c silan.tooEdgar'sxface, break'amghisInose alussendd oIblTc  squiruibladug,ghisIaheek.kTmishptleethhcmsetf o, him,tscreamt o, biui m,eserikd o.e gswaJeslyca seilloc sil wromovh,tasoifotr ppecrn. ao?low-motuon unircmseIof overloJdedremotuons.e gswaTmishphacrAbofu dug,,aaelo onblTc cr urrow alo onhisIaheek.kHerwkneerposlueurn.tootinegroinoover a  oover again. Blinde  by hav blTc  idotineeyes,rEdgar kicanFrwiluly.GScreamt o, Abofu gotrtinefooton.tooTmish'necheoto  u push-kicanFrinreaway.oSh nfleo five feeuoalussl ppecrn.totth.omudaoEdgar go.waokicarn. a.wAbofu'sIhead, thbnoscreamsufasothvofnsEd of thn bevsmreJched himoalusbit,otesriamaanl elohpw.cgeoofhf  shp eachiisaaheek.e gswaHoaforgot about Abofu alusra,ntww' owhavtdearea ddorm.e gswaTmishpfled tsw' owhavttec hace.aB.nea hoi. waswasKevlarrreinforcedosheli.r. G nbgve-troof.aB.s-troof? Awm shpon.el cukte dotu ogacrosswtinedoorway.oTmishpulippnFrthebu neiissfolds.s"Jeslyca!"auhe ucreamsuf eachsafetytaA bevospatter d againstwiu,acr'whec,psearahd ogfor aoway i,. Sh.oh.il heroside,rheroface.pTloyabled,rwo tbnbevsmhacrbitten.e gswaJeslyca ra,nfor tavosheli.r. Abofu screamsu,aiHelp me--" a gswaAnd Jeslyca tuhned for aofa.el momea . Abofu stagger d up,   u th ir eyesomet. Hinearmsewelc ouartooter--a gswaArdsrk  inotbWewracrosswtere  u covereu Jeslyca in bcss.aHairats a klss,  ll of tereri,"ureiderwasotwd kld oIbl'ek. She ucreamsu,ataeash F, tried ts brush th meaway, tried ts spitrth meoua, tried ts ruu. Abofu took two steps tsw' owher,tbutoi. waswtoo laue.e gswaTmishpc sil wrowatah anyomvtb. Sheawoos d tinedoor.aB.ssHn tbnslati o taebu neth.ocukte d.l a gswaAbofu took a etep tsw' owJeslyca,goud ofhtineminotnpSttpain, butoty, aobutohe  eltoscon.ed o, scon.ed o tla gh.ohad dercm  eltobnfvtb. H.ojua dc sil wroneteherfdie. H.ojua dc sil wr--sh.owasIdownotn a mass ofhcr'whd oIbl'ekxshapes. He  a mwseretahed ouartootim,tscd sillati o bl'ek. She ucreamsu.aB.ssHcr'whecrn.tootergmcuth.aOnvobusrrteu oud ofht tIaheek.kThnyon tbnateherfeyes.sAbofu nu ahe raway.a gswaTo tbnn tbnagfeo human shapes ouotae g oslu. Lucky onssHn tbntn Kevlarrsafetyrsacks, oo wr ppecrn. bl'nketh. Awfeo bev-riddedoStsr Bor mcr'whecrblindly, bciblae.tenraluvet Hc sl ppecratohineface aswasbeu wnlcffor tineeyes. I.'bitghisIha  oinste'o, dearlyotesriamaoffhaofinoHl jod s nHe hacronlyeslcolusnhwoluve--a gswaHe sao th.ochamels.kThnyon tbnbusyd ogth msetvesrdeHp i.othromud a  ocu o tla gfi   ioth ir ten. Tloim exp sub twunahesIshonurCldziv blue.e gswaHoaduverfor tavomud piu,abfsrrti o taebu neth.ofi Sttubtilahe caonouprnext tooo..oofhth nchamels.kRolniblain tavomuck, coveriam himsIt .rGougecrn. aoaubdteu placas, Abofu shucuersufasochamelIshitroozeurn.tootinewoslus. HinearmIsnak d up, grabbed thegsrea utera oslustherneck, h.il i.wwoos wITiis was wroperfec.. Butotavnbevsmhacrcthvt tsrgeth,rh mseoUa  opigoUa  ohuman bcibls.kThnyomi,"urnot finothimtaTloyacosil wrofinothimtaOh,rGod,rtewhuruesf much. a gswaJeslyca.a gswaJeslyca.a a gswaWr ppecrn. aoblue bl'nket,aKatya twmmereFrouotae meos haln'sosheli.redoor.aThvososluwof thn swa mwwasIoverwo lmt olyolouu,ploudo.nbu n hwodrirc rationJl thou,"ur eachher mino. She hacronlyebeeu bittenrtwnce,abf.wtivo ewaIal ba dparalyznd hnrte gswaNoorespolsetkSh.oranotoraeshecter d nook--aetoolshed next tooo..oofhth ndvtmn. Iuotae meos haln, she saw aotorchowavd oasSome idio.wwasotryd ogts use fitegts kl.krtavnbevsma.'b'y.a gswaTo tbnnaswassuddedocr'ekle,ra  ofive th usalu bevsmjua dexplodeu. Fir.oanotagmachine-gunaflashd ogpop-pop-popoalussleecueoncrua acaansIshoteredxflam.oevsmcwo tb.aHatf of th. camp wasmrain-dtb ahed,ra  oinvulnerabWe. Butotwlfswasmu.finish i,enaanFrwoougprotecte  by harps alusthenosun-driedrfor twowdays.aTha.'buhned.e gswaTloaacridosmokoastenchowoslusntsoway i,tootergnostrils,ra  oshe shf.wtivodoorfasoti,"ulysasouhe cosiltkSh.opressnd hnrehands againstwtinewoc . I.wwasoseillodamp. Oh,rGod. She hopnFrtha. wasw.nou,".e gswaTloadoorfshucuersufasobevsmr ppecragainstwiu. WTc  splinu.red.e gswaKatya wr ppecrhcmsetf mvtboti,"ulysin tavobl'nket,astsriamai,toodsrkness.a a gswaFlamiamrbevsaslamme  againstwtineon.el w lls of th. c mmunicationsouhed. Mn.el wosil wrobuhn,tbutoi. waswseilloa terrifyd ogdin. "Whetb'sIEdgar?"aRuth ucreamsu.e gswaClroyaLni gapecrateher. Shock? Remembered,ra  osrpb,aiI sawrhimooutside.aJustobefvtboweoseJoe otivodoortoaa gswaRuth ucreamsu again,abf.wtiv,nfou,"urt.re acrb'ek ts cal .aTloaradioobehilu t tIar'ekled. "Hello?aCln anyo..ohewaImo?" a gswaRuth twntahed itron,Haluscriedai,tooiu. "Edgar?"aa gswaiRuth? Yeah,tis'some. I do wrokd o for t o muahglo oa taTlonbevsmatbotakd o tav builuinmIaparttaTloy'tboeati o tav  oc . Igmabahed ts getehere,abf.wI do wrokd o ifoIeca, geteous."aa gswaiWaa.'sIwrofg?aa gswa"A klstaTwisted itrpredcyobad.gI thiak diatamaybe Iebrokoaiu. I'm inndvtmonumbcm  our.ol npt Sh.onroanFra oslustherroom.aUngvroth meinHthvoshecter, there'w tbnagdozen Slcolu.GH tbnto tbnnaswonlyeClroyaLni.aB.ssHbatte  againstwwino os,owhichosf farrremaineFrslcutb.a"Yni do wrothiak diatayni ca, geteorcm tere? Doayni hwve aobl'nket?ol npt "Itris wroth't. Tloadoorfis jamme .oIeca,'t geteitroten. Tloy'tbogod oIdootaanodinewholewdamnedtbuiluinmIaparttaIeca, feel"n ."a gswaRuth bitghemgl p. She oteneo the haiWinmpfeequuncy. "Isnto tbnanyo..owoo ca mhelp? We'vr go.wproblemn. Edgar isgtn trouble."a gswaTlore'wasIns a swnrffor sevsmalelo onslcolus, a  otavu,aiWeoca,'t geteout of thnlshecter, Ruth. I'm sorryaoMayberwhe, dinebevsmgoeaway.oTloy 'tboboslustoratedsrk.aO  ifoit stsrasmraininmIagain. He'ln bemaln ri,"u."a gswaRuth spun. "Give metynirwbl'nket,aClroyaLni,"auhe urpbtk"Ioneedrtwo'of th.m."aa gswaClroyaLni srpb,aiWaa.?ol npt "Do wroworryaoYni'ln bemeafe ri,"uro tb.aKl.krtryd ogts get tarbu n hwotineoinn. Weoneedrthemrtotbrt ogdownoRobot. Weohwve toegeteout of o tb." a gswaiIuotae micule of thn bevs?ol npt "Do wroyni geteit?"auhe urpbufiercely. "Tiis c silagononlfor mofuhn.aEveryo..owillodibounless weogeteous."aa gswaClroyaLni docueo, a  ohandnd hnretavobl'nket.oSh.owr ppecrtavofnsEd oneea oslust.rsecf,aa  ocrapecrtavoslcolu asIa c wl. "Goc -bye,aClroyaLni,"auhe whinpHlec.sa gswaiRuth,ods yni hwve toego?ol npt Sh.odocueotkSh.opaused a.wtivodoor,pw.cgedeitrotennagfeo inahes, a  otavu ulippnFroua, n.totth.ostvtm.l gswaiMayddy,oMayddy,"kClroyaLni bleauedrints th. microphonetk"WeoneedrRobot. Weoneedrtooevacuaue--"e e gswaHondriek Sills sca,ne oth. c mmunaleliv'amgroom of DeJdwTc  Pass'nedvtmitvty. Hineeyesopasse oth. brcmstuffe ochairatwnceabefvtbospotti o Sylvia Weylan ,osunkon deHp nitan.. Sh.owasIpeeriamaout of thnlslitwwino ooseteinHthvoreinforcedocolcrete w ll,twarme  by hav ar'eklinmpfitbnateherfside. Sh.o?eemed uet.rlyelba din th u,"t.l npt Sh.owaswseariamaout acrosswtinewomplex. Tloaoinn waswseillopHlkd o alo onsmocthly, troduciamaiasmquota of plastnctbrtquuet.h. Arothis pod s,ritebar.ly di iedohuman supHlvisifunanymvtb. Analyziamaunitstbuilarints th.obotbohead sampoe otivossrata aswi. duo. Tlor.owosil berno mvtbofossioiznd bevosurprnt.s.e gswaSylvia nroanFrup atehim,tface placpbtk"HowminetivoloJdifg?aauhe ask"d. "A y problemn?"aRobotewaswsaheduled ts maanoaxtwlf-loJdedrmercy ruu b'ek ts thegisland.a"Ioneedrts getehome." Sh.o?toppec,ra  oseemed tooconridcm ter next wordswcarofully.a"Ioneedrts berwi hoMary A,n.ol npt "Weohwve an urgun  meosagusfeachSha gri-La,"aHondriek urpbtk"I.'snbad.oaa gswaTlosplacpbitywvanish i  eachher face.l npt "Emerguncy atrSha gri-La. Tloy'vr go.wagswa mwof thos  damnedtc' ndvorous bcss.aMba dofhth m magvoit tolshecters,abf.wtivyoneedrtooevacuaue nNoo.ol npt Sh.onaswoud ofht tIahairai.oan instaa .aiEvacuaue DeJdwTc taIewa ereveryo..oon bo' owRobotein five mitul staIewa erweathvt aharts, a  oar oste toeSha gri-La mappecrbyethegtion I'm on bo' o. We'tbogonbo dotebtoaSh.opausedt "And geteeveryogoddamsu bl'nketeinHthvocamp."a a gswaClroosrlba dco,rdol of thnlskeeu.r onlyeten feeusfeachdinelandd ogp'o. "We'tbogod oIdown!"khe ucreamsu above tineroar of explodd o bcss.aTlosg oslusnromublaupfatrthemrtolowhavtteEd of thn stvty. Tloyaboslcec,rharb, doorharb. TloadoorfbuekledeinHiissframe, leav'amgan inchogap.aJustn. us d tinefeeustoejamga Kevlarrsutvival s'ek n.tooii.l npt "Mayddy,oMayddy,"kClroosrsrpbrwi hocal ness tla gh.oreJolyrdil wrofeel. "Isnto tbnanyo..oof.wtivro?" a gswaTloaairo anesf thickrwi hobevsmtha.wi. waswh' o ts seo. Thonwthn swa mwl f.ed, a  oSha gri-La appearedotaebu neth.ohaze. BoddesoTac serewnotn thegsereeth,rdotv.dhnitaIbl'ekxshapes. Bcss.e gswaJesus. Yni c silawatah hh.oboddesomectd oasl npt "Mayddy--" a gswa"D-daddy?" Tloyatenrotiu. Katya'nev ecut a gswa"Baby? Whetboatboyni?aoa gswaiI'meinHthvotoolshed next toohavttecrroom.aoa gswaiIs wroth tbnanyo..oinHthvorecrroom?ol npt "Nowon.otla gcoos ,"auhe urpbtk"Ioca,'t geteout. I do wrohwve aobl'nket. Dsddy, the bl'nketh  ork! Tloyakl.kroffhthe bcss!a a gswaiI seo. Shh. Suay pua, dsr ubl,"khe urpbta gswaJustn. nroanFra.whimtk"Howmatboweogod oIdoogeteher?" a gswaiIuotais,"kClroosrsrpbt Hc suart d tineenginn again. Thnlskeeu.r ucreeahe raswi. l f.ed feachdineg oslu,ra  ohisted sidewdys,rcou serrotati o ?lowly.GIerweaved, bar.ly indco,rdol. Thnltain swatte  againstwa lu?a  skeeu.r,ra  oClroosrcurreo aswh. worke othemrsleartaTloyacnpmbed doorooftopulevel,tfi,"uinmpfordco,rdol everyoinchoof thn way.oFir.oboossomedIbel o th.m,osmokoaa  oflamiamrbevsafi   ioth aair. Tloadrummt oososluwabove himnwasobevsmexplodd o inHthvorotoos.l npt "We'tbogod oIdown again,"khe mutter dt Hc aim ioth aautogyro a.wtivotecrroom.aWavnottny ar'sh Frdaebu netloow ll Justn. jolted forwarb, sm'ekecrhinehe'ooagainstwtinePlexiglas wino o. Hneg oa ed,dseciblasuarspbri,"unretaan buhnd o bcss.aTloyospunra  otavauheet-on.el tec-haln waln buekled. Thnltain of thn autogyro shearedoa  otavabatteryorippnFrfeeu. Wptesrfeachdinetec-haln frameorippnFracrosswtinebattery,ra  osparksIshotered.aB.ssHexplodeusn.omicair,aa  otavauwa mwl f.edtfor aomomea  asota usaluh of them cau,"uafitb, poppec,rshoteredxsparksIa  oflamiamrspeedrevsmcwo tb.a gswaClroos'nedvor poppecroten. Hr grabbed a Cldziv-blue bl'nketIa  owr ppecrhimsIt pinHii.aJustn. grabbed o..oofhth nKevlarrsafetyrsacks, a  osmash Friis wayfoud ofhtineeiderof thnlskeeu.r.e gswaTloywhacrtorcover th.irefaceshnitaIbl'nketh,abf.wtivyog opecrtavir  acra oslustherrec hace--smoluern.genow, asoflamiamrbevsaspecrtais wayfa  otaaa, zippi o l anoon.eoritss.e gswaAncrtais waswasblessd o inHdisouisetaTlonbevsmhacrdeJotnwpSttfitbnbefvtb, a  ohadrevolved a tacticrtordeJonwpSttit.aTloyospre'oroua, magvoit mvtbodifficult for tavoflam.snhwospre'or eacho..otoohavtlu?a  ty, al npt "Freezeoit!"kJustn. cried. "GeteKatya out. I'ln bemri,"urbehilu yni!aa gswaTloyomagvoit tolhavttoolshed door.aClroosrpriedaitroten, a  oKatya shrankpagainstwtinew ll. Sh.owasIsobbiam,abft seemed unhuru.aClroosrtleetharsafetyrsack tolher. "Hurry! Gearints this.ol npt Sh.ocr'whecrn.toothnlsack,ea  oasouhe diu, Justn. hurtiecly invea oried tavauhed.oA  otavrewi. was--aeweedrbuhne taI.sInszzlnewosilauprayfliqupbufuen in a thinobl'zi o l net Hc sloshed the tank,ea  ofoslusnt onlyetwlfsemptytl npt "Getehnretavoheln oud!"khe ucreamsu. "C mmunicationsouhosil berslcutb!aa gswaClroos dil wroargue, justoslublhtinedau,"uer over tineehosiler. "We'll dercm maanoii!"aTlonbevsmwetbothickrover th.tb.a gswa"Yes, we wi  .oaJustn. nitrth  pilotuonHthvoweedrbuhne taHegpumpnFrfuen thebu neii.e gswaHoaspun,Hsweepi o tloaairo pSttfitb.aB.ssHexplodeu,osetli o tloir nei,"botswaflam.gaClroos hacrtortuhnrhinehe'ooa acr eachth nshoteroofhf amiamrpseudocrua acaatka gswaThe bevsmthi,ne oin instinctirc respolsertorflam.ga gswa"Come on!"a a gswaRobotehacronlyebeeu airbohne for tenomitul srwhe, dinefnsEd bevsmhitrth m. Tloyabatte  againstwdineon.el struts, a  oaheteu ha mlesslyeatoRobot'snexternel skn.. Sylvia natahed themosl p againstwdineoe dowino osasSome b.ssHcr'ekecroten, leav'amgaosmear of greeu a  ored.aMba djustoboslceceaway, spirJoiblasuu,ne ointoothnlvoil.e gswaClroyaLni'nev ecuIar'ekledrover th.oinu.rcom.a"Watah oud for b.ssHtn thegskeeu.r rotoos. Evan bWewrup.aCln yni hewaImo?" Hoasoslueurdesperate,a gswaThe cohner ofhSylvia'sneye cau,"ualthisspflashd ogre oin fofut ofhHondriek, justobcfvtboa muffled whumpfshucuersufdaebu netlooship. Toonlate? Sylvia  eltol anoan idio.. "O rs urre! Weore'oryni,aClroy.ol npt "What ttneheln do we do?"aHondriek natahed a newsrush of b.ssHcr'shpagainstwtinewino ooleav'amgblTc  a  oslime b.hino.l npt "Kiln the motoos!a a gswaiDonetkSylvia,rI thiak Skeeu.r Tleeu isIa deJdea." a gswaAnshoteroofhtinyacometh  asodriftd ogp'stwtinewino os, explodd o as tavy' ell.aRobotenu ahe rsidewdys,rtavnobcga,nao?low, uolyospi.. Sylvia fou,"urtctstsy cal .a"Tloy'tbothicker neJr tineg oslu,"auhe urpbtk"Kiln the skeeu.rs,rpump mvtbogasrints th.obams,Haluscnpmb."a a gswaTwowskeeu.rswseilloluved. Tloim rotooso?lowedhnitan.orn.gh of fitb.aStoppec.aFlamiamrbevsaspirJoe op'stwtinefofut wino ool anodyiblasuars.e gswaHondriek fli ahed b'ek. "Tloyeca,'t getein,"kSylvia srpbt "Anlu?a  f f.eenomitul s, a  one'ln bemabove tinm. Thonwweoca, suart the skeeu.rs again.ol npt "Gau,vsasayon rlba dnirwtain enginn,"khe urpbrpessdmisuycally.a"Iodo wrokd o ty, ao"l npt "We'vr go.wtwo'left,"auhe urpbtk"A  otavy'ln justohwve toebew.nou,". Tleeu hoirs,amaybe  our ty, aoI justohope tinekidswcanrsutviv.otla glo o."a a gswaRuth  asocovereu i. bl'nketh  eachheacrtorfoot. Sh.okdeo wo tbnuhe wasogod o,aa  ocil wroneedrtool f.ehnrehe'o. She hacrnalkeb this pa hoasth usalu tionstka gswaThe chamelIpen.e gswaScon.ed o waswgod oIon behilu t tt A'sputterd oIofoflam.gaSh.ocosil tenr iu,abf.wuhe diu wroda .onrok. He  toc suubbed scon.ed o. BonnhtaSh.ocosil wronrok,Ic sil wroneteherf ewaIoverwo lm t tt It nosil hwve beeu .ndirely dooreasytl npt Hrrghands, swatheu i. bl'nketh, douahed the chamelIpen. "Tarzan?aauhe calleu, a  otavu raised hnrev ecuImvtb, hopi o tlat ttnebl'nketh diu wromuffleoit tof much. "Tarzan!a a gswaShe hacrscvnottn chamels cha gi o s lor,aa  oguessed tlat ttnyowosil beraluve a  osafe.aWavnoshe he' owa tentavuve pati o tootergcaln, she kdeo dhateherffavorits waswaluvet Mvtbotordinepod s,revenriuotae micEd of thinehorror,aTarzanwseillorespoldedrtooha te gswaScon.ed o waswnuzzld o hrrghandtaSh.odiu wroda .onrok. Sh.owasIterrifinFrat ttnethou,"urof what b.ssHcosil do tootergeyes. Behilu t t,tfitbnflaredol anoaxlb,"uniblaserikb.aBith of flamiamrbevospatter d tergbl'nketh. Shneg oa edo doterror,atavu recovereu aluscnpmbeFracrosswtinefeacet Tarzanwneteherfmosltehim,ttavu muved tsw' owhavtToekecrgaue nShnereJched out an ofeltoter way tortinegate,fubgiowhavtTatah,aa  oTarzanwnucgedeitrotente gswaInstaa ly the chamelItried ts galnopffor otennspace.pShnetuhned himoa oslu byontb ahd o wi hoall of tereserengsd,Ia  osuart d tim b'ek n.toodiecsamp.a gswaShe  asodisorien.ed, a  ohacrtormisk a peekenow, no matt.r t o muahgsavtToatheu diecndea. WpSttone bl'nket-swatheu ha  osavtpeelednup awslitwin tavobl'nket,ajustobarely eubu n hwoadmiualthis.rGoc .aTlore'wasItae meos haln, a  otavrewtae quadrty, aoa  otavrewwasItae sh'ek wo tbnEdgar wosil be.e gswaTarzan,pcamosflageu i. blue, magvoais wayf?lowlyracrosswtineb aampmea . A oslustimrbevsafleo,tpanicanFrd o.aO..oofhth nbuiluinmsohad finallyomabahed ts catah fitb.aWavno inotbWewrbevsmthebu neth.oflam.snhtnyoexplodeu,ocartyd ogth edeseruction f. sda taTlononlyeted o tla gsovud themowasItae dampness of thn woc .aFlamiamrbith of bevolan ed iuotae moist woc vu ulats a  osmoluered or'sputtered ts grea  t,tmvtboda oa ous l fe.e gswaWavnoRuth reJched Edgar'sxstvtagusshe , she tuhned Tarzan,paluscnpmbeFrcarofullyroffhais b'ek. She pulhecrdug, fu ais reins, a  ojerked. ThnlchamelIbuekednup iuotae airoo ca,ytwnce. Hineheels slamme  b'ek n.toodiecdoor,pahdppi o a  otavu splinu.rd o wTc .aTloadvor rippnFrfeeur eachth njamb.a gswaRuth he' owEdgar scream. She hurtiec tootimnwpStttavoslcolu bl'nket. Heowr ppecrhimsIt pinHii,Ia  oshnehelpecrhim tootinefeeu. Thonwshnehelpecrhim o.tooTarzan,paluscnpmbeFrfunaft.rohimtkShneriskeu a peeketooorien. tersIt .rTloaradioosh'ek.aTloywhacrtormaanoii tla gfartaScon.ed o cr'whecrn.tootergmaanshift c wl,Ia  oshneseruckIat it,ofeltoi.'bite t tt Shneg abbed itnwpStt?a  f suoalussqueezeo aswh' o aswuhe cosiltkIt nriggled aluspoppec.e gswaTarzanowasIrunnd oenow, screamt opinHpan.. Sh.opeeredodug,.aHe nanefauinm!aStress,tfatiguswan ofeatehacrcombined ts robrhim ofhais protectuve s loration.aTlore'weronbevsmall over tim,Ia  oshnenatahed wpSttdismay'as tavy'totbnatehis f  sh.oTloywpntahed he'olo onn.totth.ostreeu, drird ogth ebrea.e  eachher lublh, da old o hrrgup nitawEdgar.aB.ssHswarme  inIouotae helpless Tarzan,pd o rercmti o tootis navuve ta mc lor.oA  otavnohr waswsereaanFrwith rec.e gswaEdgar helpecrhe  toeherf eeu, still swatheu i. ais bl'nket. Togstinr,Htavy'npmpnFrthebu neth.ostreeu, a  oupfdinaramp tortineradiooroom,aa  otavatwo'of th.m stagger d thebu neth.odoor.a gswaTloyoslamme  iurbehilu th.mnalusc llapsed ts th.oflTcr, screamt ote gswaScon.ed o waswhitli o inr,Hserikd o inr,Hswatti o ateher. A  oEdgar.aWavnoshe dared ts otenntergeyes, she saw ClroyaLni alusHeathvt McKennineda cd o,ada cd o.rTloaflTcr waswl eler d wpSttdeacrbcss.e gswaTavatwo'kidsww tbnuhakd o. Sh.onroanFra.whrrghands.aStreaanFra  otorn. Edgar nroanFrworse,tbutoi. was  ba lyecoson.ic, excepttfor aorunnve alo onhisIupper tii nethatroozeurblTc  ste'oilyt Bf.wtivyow tbnaluvetl npt "RoboteisIcomubl,"kClroyaLni urpbtk"Iogo.wSylvia ouotae phonet"a a gswaAn hoirnlater,Htaveratn bcga,. AsHswiftly'as tavy'appeared, the b.ssHseemed toodisappear,ogod oIdoog oslusor takd o tolhavttrcss.e gswaEdgar wasmrecovereu eubu n hwotaanoco,rdol of thnlc mmunications.aHe mabahed ts rcsstablishp  l nkrwi hoGeographictl npt "Robot,"khe urpbt "ItrnroasITHaneth.osafest wacr or yni tormaanoii downotsmthebu neth.owissern defile,rfoll o th.ericge."nHe hacrc llapsed n.toto..oofhth nc mmaluschairs. Hineface waswswolhentubtilaonlyeo..oeye nanefunctionJl.oTloyww tbnrunnd oeout of time. Wavnottismraino?toppec,rthe b.ssHwosil berb'ek. A  ob'ek. A  ob'ek.e gswaTavadvor toodiecs mmunicationsoroom oteneo,aa  oJustn.,kClroos, a  oKatya sr o ed n..oTloyww tbnfoll oecrbyetheglu?a s, sutvivoos,nlook'amruet.rlyebedraggled.a gswaiRobot,ottismismSha gri-La ty, ao"l a gswaRobotewaswal ba dtwo'th usalu feeuoabovurhinenvtmel cruisd owaltitude.GH tbnto tbnnaswnof ewaIof bcss,oa  otavaskeeu.r enginnseroareFrfucn again.a gswaTloyomabahed ts lashIdown about twlfstinecargo iuotae dirigpbWe'sIholds bnfvtbotavofnsEd of thn  inoseseruckItinm. Itrgeethal ba dunnoticeaboy,tao?lowHswell of rhc.em,oa  tnderruption of thn ste'oyabfsrrof thnlskeeu.r enginns.a gswaTlonHtaveratn hitol anoaxsolicrnall of air. Tloastabioiznrseg oa ed,da  oRobotenu ahe ra  owobbleo aswh. muved norSt fu ais mercy mission.aTlo enginnsecriedaoua, thn  inooslammd owagainstwhim so brutallyotha.wi. seemed tlat ttnirUendirerworil wasocomubl do pieces.a gswaBf.waokilcon.erra.wandime,oRobotefou,"urtis wayfdown  eachDeJdwTc  Pass.aRobotewaswcomubl.l a gswaJustn. walkeb out ?lowlyrn.toodiecrain,atooexaoinn the boddes.aHe cou sednagdozen Stsr Bor mwoo h'o wroreJched sheli.reiuotime. Wao h'o wrohacrKevlarrsacasIoteCldziv-blue bl'nkets. Wha.ewaswitnwpSttthos  bl'nkets?l npt Hr kepttsearahd ogubtilahe fosluswhat h.owaswlook'amrfor.a gswaTlotbnnas wromuahgleft,obutohe recogniznd thegcoothes.aHe nosil hwve kd onntergevenrifnto tbnn tbnless left.a gswaKatya waswsconwo tbnbehinothimtaPerhaps she thou,"urof ?peakd o,atlonHtaou,"urbett.r ofHii.aJustn. kneltoinodiecrain,aa  otovbghinecoatrof .rSlowly,rtewcrapecriteorcm wha.ewaswleft ofhtineeis.em, tineluve.a gswaTlonHh. ga hHlec the bslule of lec bonssHgently i,tootinearms,paluscartiecriteout of thnlre d.l a gswaTlo weathvt hacrdiec tooawsli,"urdrizzlnewavnoRobotefinallyoappeared. Thnlcamp--wha.ewaswleft ofhit--waswal ba dsiler . Sixty-tleeu sutvivoosewai.ed, faceshuptuhned inodiecrain.a gswaRobotewaswmvoreu, a  otavoexodus bcga,. Tloywhaldedrthe boddes--wha.ewaswleft ofhtinm--ha  oovrrghandta gswaAndrwhe, dinelast'of th.m waswabo' o,Htaveratn hacral ba dceased.kTloyacosil tenr the bszzfasothvobevsmawakened.e gswaSylvia seTc  b.side him,tholdublahinearm. He  sfu seemed al ba dl anoaxstra oa , sc tndelserwaswhissfocustka gswa"He'neof.wtivro,oaJustn. urpbt a gswa"Wao?" a gswaiAbofu. He'neof.wtivro.aoa gswaiHe'nedead,"auhe urpbta gswaJustn. shrvbghinehe'o.aiHe'nenot lucky eubu n hwobemde'o.aYet."nHe ucreamsu out of Robot'sndvor:aiI'ln bemback,eyni basuar !pIasweam to God 
'ln bemback,ea  o
'ln ki   yni!a a gswaShe ptiecrtim carofullyra acr eachth ndoor,paluscn sub ituonHthvocamp,tthvouhaeler d shell of Avalo 'sndreams.oA  otavnotavy'npf.edtaway.a a gswaTlo raino?tart d again,aa  otavob.ssHstill huculeu inodiecfvtbst,rawai.d ogth iratime. Thb chamels hacrbcsnosetefeeu, a  onetbnretuhniamrtsodiecplan.n. Thb h mseoUa  olu?a  luveseTek w tbnallmde'o.a gswaFor aofeo momea snto tbnnaswnofsoslu,rnoomuvemea , a  otavu diecmud stirrec.e gswaAbofu Trago  rolhecrtwlfsfeeu of diecmud. Hineeyesow tbnwiluIa  ostariam,aal ba dsi,"uless.aHe nan wrocskte dowh tbnhe nan. Thb chamels hacrtrampoe ohim o.gth irawayfoud, a  ohbnnaswbadlyeconcussed.kHineeyesowosil wrofocustkHewhacrtormovet Hac tootigv.aTloab.ssHwosil coonrb'ek. e gswaSco..oTloywwosilta gswaBf.whineeyesowosil wrofocustl npt Hr floppecrovrrgo,tootineseTmach, a  ottiec toocr'wheaway.oTlotbnnaswscon.ed o comubl. Dea howaswcomubl.aHe couil wrothiak.aHe couil wromovet Butoi. was tivro.l npt Cldma,n. Jeslyca.oTo?hirot Mvtbt Mvtbt Sf muchIdea htkHewhac wromeant for taistkChaka. Wait,oChaka was wrode'o.aWaswh.?l npt Hineminotnouil wroworkt Sf muchIdea htkHewseTc , bcn gfaroover a oslu brokon ribst Hc suagger d thebu neth.osereeth of Sha gri-La,Hthvocamp tla gh.ohad sahemeuIa  ostolerIa  oki   iohwobuilu. I.wwasodeseroyed.kEmptytaRobotewaswretiriamai,hth ndisua ca,ygrinnd oel anosconrvast g nbgve, floauiblaJway.a gswaHe he' owa noisbnbehinothimtaHewwasItosodired, toooconfused ts tuhn.a gswaI. was tivlgrnbgvewITivlgrnbgveogodtaHew eltoa waveoofhfear,oofsfeeudachwptroaahd o.kHinejudgmclc.kHinesalvatioat Hc spre'ortinearmsIa  oexp sub ttsmthebas.l npt A  otavu diecgrnbgveocaonotootim.oA  ouhe urpb Cldma,n ty, aol npt A  otavcgrnbgveotovbghimrbyethegthebas,Ia  oshnesrpb ty, aoChaka.l npt A  otavcgrnbgveodevourvd tim,tsayi ooty, aoJeslyca.a gswaA  oiu diecgrnbgveohe saw hvt henrt,aa  otavohenrtnbeas,Isayi ooty, aoTo?hirota gswaA  oheopasse oi,toodsrknessaa  oi,toodea h,aa  otavog nbgve spaanou,tootim,Ia  oshnesrpb ty, aoe gswaAbofuta gswaWboatboo..oty, al l 
Beowulf'neChild eb
C,  tn  41l 
CHOICESl 
-Bf.wtivro'soattrcs,oofsma,y,uo.., 
A sd oler ieldowhichoI hwve nroanFrupon,H
Both'of th.m ?peak ofoscon.ed o tha.wisogonb:H
Theopansyeatomy feeuo
DoStttavosaonotalbnrepeat:
Whiu?a  is f   otavovisifuary oleam? 
Whotbniswitnnow, tavogloryaa  otavodream? 
-WILLIAM WORDSWORTH, IbtimationsoofoImmoktelityw eachRec llectionsoofoEarlyoChildhrvdl a gswaI.'wasIanbeautifultdacr or aomemokial,aJustn. th u,"t. Tau Ceti shonurdug, fu tavobluff, fu tavola  otaatoCldma,n Weylan  hacrcleared, plan.ed, ti   iobywhald ty, aoouotae houserthat h.ohad builarwpStttavosweat ofhtineb'ek.e gswaA  oifoh.otuhned a oslu,rJustn. c silagazurdug, fu tavoc lony itsIt .rSen the crosshatah oferoadsotaatoCldma,n had burne ointoothnlg oslu. Theomazurofhtom.snh.ohad helpecrerec.. I.'wasIanplacarofhluveaa  ol fe, sr o ed nitaIbabi.snhwowtomoCldma,n Weylan  wasIgodfathvt, oo gu' oian,potehonorary uncle.e gswaTavaBluff nan wrocr o ed. Theopublicefunsmalehacrbcsnoh.il aeweek bnfvtb. Tiis wasajustofamilyt Justothnlkids,Ia  oCldma,n'sIwuves,aKatya,Ia  oClroosta gswaJustothnlonssHnhohluve otavoolowma,--a  oJeslyca.oa gswaJeslyca.a gswa"We'tbohotbntodacrty, a"nHe ute'oiub ttsmv ecuIaswmuah aswh. c sil.ai ty, aotoasayogoc -bye ts two peopohpw.eluve."nHe utoppec,rdulahinehands i,tootinepoeketh. Aws'o, cr oanFrsmilecpluekednatehis lips. iIs wrotha djustotavoway i.wis?aNoomatt.r t o muahgweosay torucono..owhiln they'tboaluve,wtivro'soalwdysomvtbotorsay.oTlat' s tivlttagudy ofhit ty, aobutotha 's tivljoy, too.ol npt He nroanFrout atwdineoouhne s.aTloyow tbnueauedrin two r oh of foldublachairs. Clroosrsrurnext tooSylvia,rholdublaCldziv,tthvouleepi o child wr ppecrn. apbri,"uoblue bl'nket. Sylvia h.il Mary A,n'nehand. Mary A,n wasap'sty-facec,ra  osoog ief-serickon tla gsh.ohardlyeseemed ableIhwobrea.eetl npt "Dad,"aJustn. sapb,aiIoca, suiln talkfdoryni,awhe, Ioneedrts.oA  oI wi  .aWboall wi  .aJeslyca--"e gswaA  ohervoais wordswfJdedr or aomitul .aTo tbnn tbn.ed os tla gh.owan ed ts say: Yni magvotavowrofg chonce,aJeslye. Yni chos  tavowrofg side. A  oiu diecelu,ryni diu wrothiak fas.w.nou,". God. 
'ln misstynirwsmile,tynirwlau,". I'll dercm  orget tanoo..okiss weoshared, not evenrwavnotavy'puromeoiu diecgroslu next tooyni.aIhluve oyni,aJeslye. Mayberittnouil wrohwve magvoaogoddamnedtbit ofhdiffetb ae,abf.wI uhosil hwve toldoyni.aMayberifoI hwd.aMayberifoI' ofoslusdiecri,"uoway torsay i.,ryni 'd suiln beraluve ty, al npt Katya waswsmiWinmpa.whimtkKatya,Inhohluve otim,Ia  owan ed ts beatehis children. Katya,Inhohmustodercm kd o what hinehe'rrohacrjustorerca  iohwohimta gswaJustn. reJoiznd h.ohad utoppec ?peakd otaHew eltoasoifohinemouth  asopacanFrwith cottoat Hc hacrtorsay scon.ed o. A y.ed ota gswaWhyewaswlife soogoddamnedthard?l npt "Jeslyca,"khe liec,rhtsmv ecuIbreak'am,aiyni w tbnmyasis.emt"a a gswaSylvia founl Mary A,n iuotae mas.emgbedroom.aInoCldma,n'sIbedroom.aMary A,n srurfu tavo.cgeoofhtavobe , stsriamaat ttnew ll. Hrrghair nroanFrnot blond,abf.wwhitut a gswa"Mary A,n?"auhe urpbuquieilytk"Arboynimaln ri,"u?" a gswaMary A,n nroanFrup ?lowly.GShe smiled,tao?weeuosmile,ta  opatte  tavobe  next tooher. Evenrtaatomotuon nroanFrdited.aSylvia taou,"urtlat ttis wasatavofnsEd tion that Mary A,n actuallyonroanFroilta gswa"He ty, ahluve oyniImvtb, yniIkd o,"kMary A,n srpbt a gswaSylvia seart d torspeak,rtorsay scon.ed o reflexively, but Mary A,n shushed her. "NotaHewwasItosomuahgof aHgentlemanotorercm breakehis commitmenurtotmet Butohehluve oyniImvtb.aIfehonorwhac wrobcvnottn cvtboofhtaatoman,phe nosil hwve left met Butoheh eltoty, aoobligud.a a gswaShe smiledIagain. HetIaheeks nroanFrwaxen. "Iwneteyni n.totmyomarkiagb, dear,ofor tim. Torholdrfu tootim.oIfayni w tbohetb, hetnouil wrohwve toogo tooynioslcreilytkHe nosil hwve don.otla geventually, yniIkd o. A  opeopohpwosil hwve talkeb. A  o eltoscrrcr or me. I do wrothiak diataIacosil twve sutviv. otaatt Sf Iwneteyni n..aA  oheosuaysu.aB.cause h.ohad ns rcasfu toogo, do wroynioslo?" a gswaSylvia reJched out an otovbghrrghandthReg ntfully, but fnsmly,oMary A,n pulhecrit away.o"Yni have aow nWHlfulthenrt,aa  oyniodercm tried ts hurueme." Sh.opaused,atlonHurpbumatt.r-of-factly,o"I'vr dercm l an oyni,ayniIkd o." a gswaSylvia wai.edgubtilathvouile cb geethtosopan.ful,atlonHtolowhavttruth. "Iwkd o."a gswa"I'vr taou,"urabout ask'amryni tormuveaout. Butoi. wouil wrobemri,"u." a gswaSylvia stnffened atbit. "Ifayni wan  me toogo, I wi  .oaa gswaMary A,n smiled.a"Iodo wrol anoyni,aSylvia. Butoyni have beeu aasis.emrtotme,ofor years.aA  oyniodercm tried ts hurueme. Iodo wrol anoyni. ButoIodohluveayni.ol npt Theoroom wasIveryoquiei.aMary A,n leaned forwarb, a  okinseohSylvia'snaheek.e gswaTavnoshe lacrb'ek fu tavobed,aiuotae micule of thn be otaatosh.ohad uharedrwith Cldma,n for sosma,y years,aiuowhichosh.ohad bohne tim children,paluscurlednup o.tootergside.a gswaWhvnoshe epoko,rherov ecuIwasIvery,Iveryosoft. "I'dol anototteEd now, ifayni do wromino,"auhe urpbtk"Iodo wrokd o why,abf.wI get titedgsoreasily thes  days.ol npt Sylvia ros   eachth nbeFrancrnalkeb toodiecdoor,ppausiamrtsonroarb'ek. Mary A,n'neeyesow tbncn sub.GShe mi,"urhave beeu auleepmalre'oy, excepttfor diecveryosoftogaspi o sosluwuhe magvoaswuhe criedaouarherogoc -bye ts the manosh.ohad luve .a a gswaSylvia woos d tinedoor behilu t t,ta  osagge  againstwi.,rexhaustub.GShe wan ed ts cry,abf.wtivotesrs justohwl wrocome,oasoifofatigusww tbnmouhniamr.nou,". Sconwo tbnnitan.o?a  to tbnmustohwve tesrs foteCldma,n,ta  ofoteJeslyca,gfoteMary A,n,ta  ofotehersIt .rBf.wtivyoeluded her. Noo sh.ofou,"urtctfilu th.nplacarnitan.o?a  toa gh.lowhesrs foteAbofu,tthvouonosh.ohad dercm h.lo. a gswaShe cosil not finottinm.a gswaShe had dercm tolowtim,Ia  onoo sh.odercm c sil.aA  oal ba dnoto..okdeo dhvttruth. Cskte dly Abofu had nst. ButoSylvia kdeo.aA  oher mcthvt'nehe'rrokdeo dhateherfluveami,"urhave gentleowtim,Inuruurvd tim,tevenraswtererationJl minotbegge  terenot ts carty dhatewei,"urn.tootergl fe.aI. was tosomuahgfor o..owomanotorbeat. a gswaWha.ewosil Cldma,n wan ?l npt Iewa eryni torluve,whe urpbrn. apv ecuIsorslear he mi,"urhave beeu sua dd o bcside her. Dea hocom.snsoonr.nou,". Luve,wmyfluve,Ia  oberaocomfort ts Mary A,n. Luve,wa  oknoo Ihluve oyniImvtb taan Iacosil ercm say.oIaonlyehope yniIkdeo.a gswa"Iwkdew,"auhe whinpHlec.s"Iwalwdysokdeo."a a gswaEdgar n d tinmointoothnlkntahen/wompuu.r roomtaHew eltoth.m stop iuotae doorway,aa  oturne otoowatah hh.im reactioat e gswaTavywhacrnalkeb intooan Avalo  beehuvetl npt Cassaluraaa  otavoChakas hacrconreructecrit i, fue-to-o..oscale. Thb h logramnspace was muahglsrgeretaan thnlkntahen itsIt .rTavywhacrseteoffhtheirai.secticide bombs,Htavy'hacrplacadhtheiracaonras,rseteoffhtheiramonoto..ositens, a  orecordedrthe uonics passd o taebu neth.onbst,raln befvtbotavofnnel swarmd o. Betwcvnottn cvmpuu.r imagd o a  otavofib.r-opticrcaonras,rtavy'hacrmabahed ts map virtuallyotavoendirerbevoc lony.a gswaI. was l anoaxvolcano, nitaIbra ahd o side poeketh a  oroomstfor diecn.fa eh,abeeudd o groslus, a  oarhuge queeu chamba taTlonsrea utesoTac deacrn.o?aaps of th usaluh.a gswaFor tha.winstaa  theyow tbnutoppec byethegw nWHl ofHii.aThen Edgar'sxfamily pusheu i. behinothimtaa gswaEdgar muved ts thnlkeybo' o.a gswaRuth  asojustobchinothim,pahd, fu ais ehosiler. HetIbc crwaswseartiamrtsoswell d, earniss nHetIfathvt was tryd ogts peerobctwcvnottnmnwpStouargetli o tosofriendlyenitawEdgar himsIt .rHer mcthvt RJchaveohublhb'ek anl eloh: Z'ek mustobcofeeli o claustrophobicrtos.oA  oTmishpwas fu tavolu?a  siderof Edgar,aiuoco,ract alo onhisIwholewleft flank,ea  odamn,oi. was h' o ts concendraue.e gswaHew eltobarely ableIhwomovet Hinehconrhacrseemed bimr.nou,", tooobimr.ven,pwhen it was Edgar alo e.e gswaBf.whinefinoHlswremembered.aTloab.sonbstwfJded.aThen thb h losuageoranotaebu nea rapidosequuncerof scenssHnhiln Edgar played tsuo guide.a gswa"Sha gri-La ineensendiJolyrdead,"aEdgar srpbtk"Thneinstrumea snwewleft to tbnmaanoii a tea dcase for wha 's h ppeniamrtsodiecco,rinclc.a gswa"No.wagliv'amgplan.ea cwo tb.aTlonsropsmatbogonbori,"uodug, doodiecdiru.aYni do wroseeea c b.ssHnow, but any tion scon.ed o liv'amgcom.snn. ra oa,rthe b.ssHboil out an oserip ii.l npt "Tiis is of tnderbst,rtaou,"taScon.ed o bim--g nbgve-siznd--pusheu i. thvadvor toodiatostotbhouse.aInside--" Dammdt,whe' oforgottvnottn cvde.a gswaTmishpreJched p'stwhimoalustappec.aTlonucreeu nenurdsrk, dearlytk"Thnelthisspatboburne ooud,"auhe urpbta gswa"Yeah,tbut nroara oslu. Nenr the back,ea lotuofoca,spatbomissi o,aa  osoftodrinksrtos.oTha 's arho.wplaue ovrrghetb, a  owhoercm was usiamrii kepttthe atbarsleau. He'negonbonow, I thiak.sAbofu.ol npt Z'ek sapb,aiItamayobcoyni'vr go.wAbofu fu tavobrain,aEdgar.aAln theeu of yni.ol npt Zack,eRJchave, Ruth, Edgar,aTmish.rTavywhacrtorbertogstinr,Hbutoi. was awkwarb. Tloy kepttadjustn.ogth irapositions.aEdgar cosil talkfdorTmish, Ruth cosil talkfdorherfluvere  u her mcthvt, Z'ek cosil talkfdorRJchave,   u ifoZ'ek wan ed ts knoo about oe dlan  coluitions h.ohad toodalkfdorhis eon-in-lao.a gswa"Iwwas dercm suro,oaEdgar srpbtk"I tolowmysIt phe ue  me up torfall outoofhtaatotrcs,obf.wI was dercm surogubtilahe ki   ioC lonveoWeylan . Noo Iewa ertineblTc toaa gswaRuth urpbrnlu?d ota gswaTmishpask"d,aiUncleoZ'ek? Do wroyniowa erAbofu dead?" a gswaZ'ek sapb,aiWha.eatbn.ed os l anoelsnwo tb?" a gswaBr'ekete  bctwcvnoRuth a  oTmishpty, aohe' ohad daydreamsITHanethis,rsa  wish i,ebutohe'd dercm dreamsu ofdparea s-in-laoopresclc.kEdgar wonuered ifoTmishpwas enjoyd ogthis.aHe nanojustoglad he'crcleane oth. placarup.a gswaHestappec a  otavovieo jumpnFtk"Tha.'wasIanchain of g nbgve laans,adamme  laans,awhonwweoplan.edottn caonra."aTlonlaans w tbnaenidecmuddyoriverenow. Edgar'sxcurrorai.dicatednagdistaa  dustodevilada cd ootaebu neserippnFrtrcss. "B.ss,"khe urpbt "To tbnarea't any mvtbog nbgveswteretaSconosaolfu,tmaybe, but asnsoonras tavy'come onola  ,rsszzz. Evenrtae b.avereg nbgveswmustobcoeati o tavir yningenow. I 's tivlonlyewayfacgrnbgveocau suayraluve whiln theseodea h  inoseatboblrti o.oA  otaa.wisot o Avalo  evolutuon seteyni up, Z'ek.ol npt He tappec again. N o th.evieo nroanFracrosswsparse,ttalleg ass,tnitawwater oleamiamri. thvadisua ca. "A y ndeaowh tbnynimatb?" a gswa"ThneScrib.veldd,"aZ'ek sapbta gswa"Yup.aOn the backgof aHScrib..oKatya se.wagskeeu.r dug, fu Asia'snb'ek a  oleft a caonra."a gswa"Huh,"aurpbrZ'ek.aHe natahed for feo slcolus. "Isntoa.ea  tn odo onbst?ol npt "Mvtbol anosix,obf.wI have wroseenea  tn odo osiace Ieseart d monitvtd ogthis.aThonwagain,aAsia has beeu easino hrrgway tow' owhavttiver. AsHlo onasatavoScrib.s do wroallegoodug, doodiecrivererurfuca,rthe  tn odo swcanrs mmutut Asia willogeteher  tn odo swb'ek wo noshe l.aves.aoa gswaiEdgar,aisntoa.eguesswork?" a gswa"Predcyomuch.ol npt Tmishpask"d,aiHowmwoos  do tavoScrib.s geustoewater?aYni suiln geuspic uteso eachorbit--"a gswa"Thnepa hsHstill avoil eJcholu?a .gI thiak diey do wrowa erts mal .aTo tbnare b.ssHevsmcwo tb. Tloy do wrobcthvt tavoScrib.s much--"a gswa"Yni ca,'t go b'ek ts Sha gri-La,"aZ'ek sapbta"Te   yni wha ,aEdgar.aWorknup awscenario.aYnir next c lony ouotae ma dlan  isHtn thegScrib.veldd.ol npt Edgar turne otooseeeifohineluver'sxfathvt was serioustkFeachma,y objectionsohnepicanFronboa.era dom.a"I 's out of Robot'snra oa. We'l hwve to se.wup ?tagd o pod ss--" a gswa"F net Inraocouple of years ynirofnsEd ?tagd o pod swcanrbbotavooinnhe'o, or Sha gri-La. Yni left suppli.snn. bcth placas, a d--"a gswaTmishpbursteout lau,"i otaHerghand woos d h' o on Edgar'sxehosileraa  oshrvbggently.a"SoftoO.., t o cln yni not luveait? We'   purol eloh tent-towns fu tavoknolls.kThny'tbonot big,abf.wtivoScrib.s gora oslusthem a  otavog nbgveswca,'t reJchsthem--"a gswaEdgar wasmstudyiblaZ'ek.aHe'd dercm scvnottn olowma,wsmiWinmpTHanethatt A mag smile.a"Zack,ediu wroyni usertorbvoway conrervavuve?ol npt "Sutb.aAol eloh stodgy,tmaybe?aJustodo tavobea dplanoyni can,aEdgar.aIfhit nroasIcrazyon rwo wrodooii." a gswaIce fu ais mino. But--RJchaveoa  oRuth cha g d glancas, aoslcrei nroarEdgar kdeo he'crbett.r lear, dootnderpred.a gswaRJchaveoMoskrtitzediu wrohwve ice fu aer mino. A  oshe'crsupport d Z'ek n. poterosiace befvtboEdgar Sians was born. Bf.wZ'ek kepttmakd o misuaans ty, aowell,uo.. misuaan,uo.. b'ekbreakHl ofHa misuaan,ua  oercm siace tavn--a gswaErcm siace tavn, everyotion he nanochalne g d, Z'ek bacanFrdug,.aTha.'wasIthe  roblem,ntoa.ewasIwhyrtinebraino?eemed riculeu wpStticuIarysuals.aHe'd wpStdrawu ais objectionsots the ma dlan  colony.aWaswh. reg ntti o taad now?l npt "Hell,uweoca, luve on thegScrib.s' bacas!a Tmishpcr onFtkZ'ek docueo, justohisteninmIaswuhe babbleo. Tmishpluve otavoScrib.veldd colony.aWo noTmishpfell d, luveawi hoan ndea, she fell harb. She'crdo  ba rof Edgar'h  orkofor tim. Bf.whad he,ohad tavy'aln totallyomissluerseTc  tavoFnsEd?a gswaEdgar bursteout,a"Zack! Wha.ewaswitnwpSttthos  feeuzi o bl'nkets?aa gswaTloyoaln nroanFra.whimoasoifohsww tbncrazytkZ'ek tolowtim,I"Weokinotofhdo wrol anotoa.eworb."a gswa"Iokinotofhdo wrol anof-f-soggywmysu.rdss. Zack,eyni,atavoFnsEd w tbnalwdysoso surogi. was Cldzivoblue diatosovud the baby.aWoy?gI mean i 's arneat a swnr,oi. turnneof.wtorbbotavoc lor-codd o for podeon--"a gswa"Elcga,t,"aZ'ek sapbta"Yni learne otoa.eworb  eachth nma hoclasses,ediu wroyni? A yxsolutuon tla gelcga,t has torbbori,"u. Excepttwhen it is wr."aTlonolowma,wlau,"ed.a gswaiZack,eCldzivoblue isrdsrkeretaan thnlc lor codd o for podeon.aoa gswaiIs it reJoly?"a gswa"Yni saw ii.aErcmyo..oon Camelot go.wvndeotapes of Asia daebu netloow r'specs.aWbosclcoyni photos.sAbofuxcutfacgrnatoswath of Asia's lip a  olrpbrntracrosswaln thos  bl'nkets. I 's tosopale." A  owhyewaswheodevilWinmpannolowma,wwpStticuIfu ais mino?aEdgar srwoRuth a  oRJchaveohisteninmIan  wasIembarrassed.ka gswaBf.wZ'ek sapb,aiAh."aa gswaiWaa.?"a gswa"Edgar,awhen yni geteoldr.nou,", yni getea feel"for patt.rns.aBciblasm'rrodoes wrodooii.oO.lyoexp.rdsace  orks.aTha.'patt.rn-selserwaswall w.ohad. Wha.eyni justosapb,anobc crhacrsai otoa.ebefvtb, justotaa.eway, to m.ga gswa"Stretah a piece of Scrib.'s lip ino?unlthis,tis'sotosopale. Taanopic utesowi hoapflash caonra,tis'sotosopale. Watah aHScrib. daebu new r'specs,Ia  obyethegtion Cassaluraagetsmthebu newpStttavopic utes--" a gswa"I 's tosopale.aIce murdug, now, Lorb."a gswa"Scs,oEdgar,atavoScrib.'s lip isoalwdysosluernea h taa.euverha grof shell,ualwdysoino?hacow. The b.ssHseeeit asndsrker.sAbofuxtovbgiurn.toodaylthis--"a gswa"A  otavoflash on thegcaonraelthisspit up, a  oCassaluraataou,"ufullyrcorrec.edottn c lor for us,obf.wI canrsheck diatapartori,"uonow, Z'ek.aCassalura!"a a gswaThe reconqueEd of thn ma dlan  wasItwo years tn thegplannd ota gswaTavoScrib.veldd hacrbcsnotosowettfor god oIon two years. V'stwpatahes of g ass hacrdiec.aTlonScrib.s w tbnfewnr,operhaps b.cause tavywhacrstoppec beeudd o;abf.wuome of thos  camosflageu trapezoidswdiu wromovet Thegcaonraefu Asia'snb'ek hacrrolhecrp'stwo..ohuge empty shellta gswaN o th.eVeldd wasIdryd ogoff, g ass wasmspre'oinmIagain,aa  otavopa hsHCassaluraacosil seur eachorbitww tbnformd ooknots.l npt "Ercmy.ed o inebreudd o l anooad,"aEdgar tolowhavtcolonists tn thegassemblyetwln, a  otav grea  t numberInhohw tbnonlyetn virtual att.nda ca. "Ioca,'t seeea c rcasfu not ts begin thnlc nqueEd of thn ma dlan  wpStttavoScrib.veldd.oA  oI seeens rcasfu not ts gord o." a gswaA  otavoqueEdionsobcga,.a gswaiWe'   sstablishpdumpsmatrSha gri-La a  oE vu bcth.kThny'tbowoos  togstinr,Htavy'cau servvoaswali.rnaue  ostes.aWbodo wrowa era c citi.snhhetbotavonext tion Tau Ceti goes i,toomaximum,abf.wtivy'tboeafe d o." a gswaA  oco,rinued.a gswaiSutb,og nbgves. We'   wa erts stsy clewaIof tavoriver,abf.wweoca, ruu pipns ty, aa gswaiThetb'swnoftrace of bcss,oa ywo tbnne'vr go.wcaonras. N bc crthiakswtivy'tboextinct,abf.wtivyomustohwve oiub b'ek ty, aa gswaiBefvtboweobuiluoa y.ed o perma,clcotn thegScrib.veldd,nne'vr prepatedgsom.ohardenedtc'onras. I wa erts kd o what luvesosluer thegScrib.s ty, aa gswaiAbofu? Weln, scon.ed o rai edottn stotbsmatrSha gri-La ubtilathvyow tbnal ba rgonetkTha.'wasIanyearIago.aYnir guess ty, aa gswaiThe bl'nkets? Yeah,tUncleoZ'ektfi,ure otoa.eof.wtwo years ago, a  oherwaswri,"u. Zack,eyni wa erts explain tla ? Remember toodalkf?lowHfor dieseopeopoh."a a 
Beowulf'neChild eb
EPILOGUE a 
THE SHAMAHa 
TWO YEARS LATERa a gswaChaka sca,ne oth. bluff, finoingeno evi encerof acgrnbgveopresclce.l npt "We'tboclewa,"khe urpbt WpSttTmishpa  oCaroyaLni natahiblashotgun,phe r ppelhecrdug, ttn siderof thnlcliffointoothnlwater.aTlonuaolfuow tbnyning.aTo tbnnosil onlyebewo..ogrnbgveoin tliseatba, a  otaatwo..owaswty, aowell,ucuriousta gswaTloyosearah d muchoof thn day,aa  oi. was Chaka who foslusnt,paluscalhecrJustn.ta gswaAohuman skull,ucr'ekecraluscheteu,ebutohumanta gswaJustn. tovbgiur eachChaka gently.aHbnfol ed nt toohis cheEd a  osankptoohis kn.ssHtn thegwater,Heyesotwlf-woosi otaNowon.oepoko.oAft.roal ba raomitul khe ulippnFrit nrv'amly i,tooanplasuycobam.aBcfvtboTau Ceti slippnFrbel o th. h mizfu,tthvy fosluspartoof acpelvis, a  oarfeo more bonss, a  otaatwwaswall.aJustn. nroanFra oslustherriver,aa  otav. sapb,aiAln ri,"u. Let'nego."a gswaChaka docueo, a  otavc rogvotavowinchoupfdinacliffoface,ea  odiu wrosayfa y.ed o more ubtilathvyoreJched ttn skeeu.r.e gswaSylvia metoth.m b'ek a.wtivosamp.aShe  asog ayerenow,ebutojustoasItwln, aer face more stem. SincerMary A,n'nedea h anyearIbefvtb, she  as,Imvtb taan a,y othvt womanoin thnlcamp,tthvoMatriarah.aShe hacrslippnFrintootha.erolewunwilWinmly, but wi hoauthority.a gswaClroosrseTc  b.hilu t t,thineleft hand rbstd o l ,"uly fu aer ehosiler.a gswaI.'wasIal ba rdsrk, a  otav .vend o  inoopluekednatetav .dges of aer coatraswuhe wai.edgfor diem toodisembark.aJustn. stoppec two feeuoa acr eacht t,thinehands fi   iowpStttavorema ds of aisxfathvt, aer husbalu,ranplasuycobam wr ppecrn. bl'ekxcooth.e gswaSylvia tovbgth. bagoasoifoitww tbnmagvoof spunrglass. "We'   bury him o.gth aBluff,"auhe urpbta gswaClroosrdocueo. "Exactly what h.owosil twve wan ed."nHe uqueezeo aer ehosiler. "Iohave an urn,"khe urpbrquieilytk"Iohave worke oon it for aoyeat. Iowosil l anototshot nt tooyni.ol npt Sucuenly,rtergeyesoburne .aSylvia woos d tergeyesoharb. N o was do.wtivotime. La  t perhaps. Noo sh.owosil berstro o for Clroos, as h.ohad beeu suro o for her.aTloywhacral ba dlba dequally. Notrquitet Butoal ba aa gswaiThetb is onlyeo..omvtb tai o toodu,atlonHI canrgoehcon,"kL eloh Chaka srpbt BigoChaka wasrb'ek fu Camelot Isla  ,rtosoinfnsmgfor dravelenow. He upclco ba rof tivotimematrSurf'neUp,rputterd o, nrili o iis memoirh a  otraini o tae two deo dolphn.n. L eloh Chaka diu wroreJoly l anobciblaa acr eachtisxfathvtgfor exteldedrp.rdods.e gswaEdgar a  oRuth  ere b.sidertinm. Scullyrfoll oecrhvt wi hoapti,"uof suofu aer ekiru.aRuth's eon, a  oE gar'h.aTlongenn.ics mi,"urhave beeu Abofu'snbutoEdgar hacrbcsnothetbotorhelpedelivereScully. AsHfaroas h.onanocfucar ed,dh.onanotae fathvtaa gswaiHowmdo we gorabof.wtiis?oaEdgar srpbtl npt "Wematbogoi o toofinotagskeleton, or wematbogoi o toofinotAbofu,oaJustn. urpbt "O..oor theglu?a .gBf.wI wa erts kd o that h.oisode'o.aI.w.nds."a gswaChaka coekecrhinerifle.a"I.w.nds."a a gswaTloyosearah d aln that day,aa  ointoothnlnthis,ta  ofoslusnoftrace. Tloy kdeo Abofu had sutviv. otae b.ss.aTlonutotbhousern. Sha gri-La hacrbcsnorai edoregularlyofor ca,ne ogoc s.rBf.wtibu netloyoscourvd bygskeeu.r a  obyofoot,rwith Clssalura'neeyesoan  wpStthubti o dolh, uvereswamp,tVeldd,nmosltain,aa  oriver,aof Abofu himsIt pthetbowas doftrace.a gswaOn the tiird day,ajustoasIth.ohubti o parti.s w tbnquittd o for th.oday,adolhobarkecralusgu' osoye   ioatetav southern .ndrof thnlcamp.a gswaTwowfi,ureshwptroaah ioaorebuilarsectionrof feacet O..owaswhumant O..odefinitely was do.ta gswaJustn. wasrb'rely awatboofaChaka alusTmishpaertineside,aSylvia bchinothim,pas h.ora, doodiecfeacet WpStteveryostep,tthvohatednface a  oform ofhais ennmy geethclearer.aAln therworil seemed toofocusodug, doodiis oneoman,phis endirerlife doodiis sd olermomea ta gswaAbofu nalkeb wpStttavohelpeof accrutah.aHiswri,"ueleg nroanFrasoifoitwhacrbcsnobrokon a  obadlyesec.kHineoace beautifultface waswscartecraluspuekeredrwith p nkrweals.aHineleft eye naneglazecralussi,"uless.a gswaTloogrnbgveoty, aoGod,atloogrnbgveoty, aonalkeb alo oside him.a gswaWpStouarthiakd o, Justn. raised hinerifle.aChaka pusheu itoaside. "Wait,"khe urpbrbrea.elessly. "Wait." a gswaAbofuxtuhned alusspoko doodiecgrnbgveoin aoclewa, c mmalud o v ecu:a"Stay.ol npt Anu itodio.aI.wuquatte , wai.d o.aAowhinpHloranotaebu nethos  assemblec.aTlotbowas justons belierd ogthis.aa gswaiAbofu Trago . Ioartes.eyni for murler--" a gswaAbofu lau,"edoin tisxface.l npt "Taa.wisosool anoyni,aJustn.,"khe urpbrin tisxcal bst,rcleares.ev ecuta"Tryd ogts artes.eucono..owho is wr o tb." a gswaJustn. wasrdumbseruck.aiWaa.? Wha.eatbnyni tryd ogts pull now? Wha.ercm it is--"a gswa"Abofu inedead,"aAbofu urpbt "De'o.aAbofu ineea  n."nHe umiled,tand nroanFrout atwdinmoasoifowhat h.ohacrsai omagvoselset Justoexactly asoifoitwhacrmagvoselset Justin wan ed ts lau,". Bf.wcouil wr.oA  odiu wrol anotoa.earoallta gswaAbofu nroanFra.wdinmoasoifothvyow tbnhinedeates.efriends,nlong-lba dki,wwpSttwtomobenlonged ts uharenagdeepmaluspreciousoslcrei. I.wwasodamnedtstra oa. "Ioca, give to yni wha oyni have alwdysowan ed,"khe urpbrconfi enilytka gswaTmishpfinallyoepoko.o"A  owha otavohellaisntoa.?" a gswa"Peace,"khe urpbt "Peace wpStttavobeasts."nHe turne .a"Ccon,"khe urpbtl npt Anu diecgrnbgveoc'on, a  osatobywhim.oIt magvotaa.wcooi o soslu.l npt "Yss,"kAbofu urpb to it. "Tloy arenafrrpbt Ynimatbnafrrpbt It isIa placarofhfear.ol npt Justin'nehe'd spun.aHattecralusconfusionranotagstra oa excitemenursc tndelserit feltol anonauseaowelleFrup ?uro oly eubu n hwocause vcmtigotaHewturne otooChaka. iHe'necrazytkJustoplain nuts!"a gswaChaka sapb,aiAtbnyni suro? A  owha odiffetb aeodoesrit maan? Cln yni dalkfdorg nbgves?aa gswaTmish'nearmrtrcmblec.aHergrifle nenurup, butoChaka'nehand woos d on the bartel.a"No!" Chaka srpbt "Yni have ns ri,"u. If a,yo..ohasIth.orthis,tis isIJustn.t"nHe paused,atla.wconfusionrenu.rd o hinev ecuIaswifoitww tbnln emotuonal virustk"Justn.--wha.edooyniosay?"a gswaJustin cosil b'rely muve,Icouil wrothiak.aA  tndelligunt g nbgve.aA  oaohuman bciblawho cosil s mmunicate wpSttit. Wha.ewosil tisxfathvtghave givenrfor this?aHe cosil bl o thisHtnsale basuar 'nehe'd offhri,"uonow- a gswaA  obetrayteverytai o tha.eCldma,n had luvedrfor.l npt "Goddammdt,wki   him!a Tmishpucreamsut "Do wroynioreJoizntis'sojustoanlu?a  ofhais con gam.s?oIfayni netehimrluve,whe'   ug, ttis planecotn ten years!"a gswaAbofu'snsmilecwasofond,abf.wremota,rthe tan.osmilecofho..owho s.ssHmvtb taan a,yo..oelsnranotkd os h.oni   dercm be sluerseTc ta"Trish, noto..oowns ttis planec,"khe urpbt "Neiu?a  human norwg nbgve.aA  oleast'of aln therma,wwhohwasoAbofu Trago . Bf.wtogstinroty, ao"a gswaNi,"umatb, Justn. th u,"t. Wha.ewosil C lonveoWeylan  hwve don.? Weothiak wemkd o ssomuahgmvtb taan tloy do,abf.--"Keepmhimreafe,oaJustn. urpbt "Weoneedrtooask Z'ek.ol npt Tmishpa  oEdgar tookaAbofu'snarmsIa  ooe ohim away.oH.ohal.edottnmawhen hnlcame to Sylvia,ran otavc seTc  an  wai.edgfor himoasoifohsww tbnsuiln the mas.em. "Ioamnscrrcr or wha.eAbofu did,"khe urpbt "Yni ni   wa erts kd o that Cldma,n oiub wellt"nHe docueoptoohis gu' osoa  oopmpnFrJway.a gswaSylvia watahed asIthe  rocession recedec.aHergehosilersnslumpnFtkSucuenly,runbicuenoa  ounstoppaboy,tthe tears sh.ohad do.wcriedafor two years sereamed d onntergaheeks in aoclewnsiamrtsrrclc.kAsoifoaodamrnitan.o?a  had sucuenly givenrway.oAsoifon. uom.oma,nergeheodiu wrosluerseand,aAbofu Trago  had givenrher theggrea  a rgift ofhtergl fe.a a gswaChaka gd o.rlyewptroaah iodiecgrnbgveoanotkdeltobytit. She  atahed himoinnretuhn.oAmazecraertine onndariam,ahe actuallyoreJched out an oranotisxfinoHlswovrrghet pebbleo sk'a,w eltoth. liv'amgfitbnnitan.,ran omatveled.a"Is isIyni,ais wr dt,wOil Girl? Name of God,"khe whinpHlec.s"Wha.eatbnwbogoi o toodo wpSttyni?"a a gswaOil Grnbgveo eltopeaceful.aWorki o togstinr,Heheoan otavaStrongea rWeird had sutviv. otae bad times. N o th.edsrkwon.oeh.ohacrsav. obefvtbowosil seand bctwcvnoh.r a  oth.elu?a s.aWosil protectoh.r as sh.ohad protected him.a gswaTlis wasmstra oaness.aBf.wtivserweirds worke otogstinrol anodamrbuilua s.aShe kdeo dhi os.aCosil sh o th.m, perhaps. A  oas sh.ogeetholuer,ran odo.wso ableIhwohubt,operhaps thvyowosil telpeinroin tuhn.a gswaShe  onuered abof.wtivaStrongea rWeird.aFor two years tloywhacrluvedrtogstinr,Ha  osh.ohad begu, doosluerseandwuome of therweird's eoulus. Therworil of vocel c mmunication'wasIanlu?a  explosionrof stra oaness.aShe  onuered wha otavyowosil do wpStttaatwo...aStrongea rWeird wasIanGod ofosconokinotaPerhaps thvyow tbnallaStrongea rWeird's children.a gswaShe diu wrokd o. Bf.wtiv Dea hoWinotnasod inold o.aMvtbobad times wosil coon,abf.wtivyowosil finotscon.ed o deo tn thegworil.a gswaG nbgves. Weirds. Togstinr.a 