

THE

GRIPPING

HAND

 

LARRY NIVEN

AND

JERRY POURNELLE



For Marilyn and Roberta, those most patient of ladies

 


Dramatis Personae

 

Sinbad:

 

HIS EXCELLENCY HORACE HUSSEIN BURY. Imperial Trader and Magnate;
Chairman of the Board, Imperial Autonetics, Ltd. and owner of the yacht
Sinbad

 

SIR KEVIN RENNER, KCMG, Captain, Imperial Space Navy Reserve; pilot of
Sinbad

 

NABIL AHMED KHADURRI, Valet and Personal Secretary to Bury

 

CYNTHIA ANWAR, Companion to Bury

 

REUBEN FOX, Captain of Imperial Autonetics ship Nauvoo Vision

 

SIR LAWRENCE JACKSON, Governor of Maxroy's Purchase

 

RUTH RACHAEL COHEN, Lieutenant. Commander, Imperial Space Navy Intelligence

 

AJAX BOYNTON

JAMES SCOTT Snow Ghost Hunters, Maxroy's Purchase

DARWIN SCOTT

 

RODERICK HAROLD. LORD BLAINE, DSC, GCMG, Earl of Acrux, Capt. ISN
(Ret.), former master of Imperial battle cruiser MacArthur

 

SANDRA (SALLY) LIDDELL LEONOVNA FOWLER, LADY BLAINE, onetime doctoral
candidate in anthropology, wife of Lord Blaine

 

THE HONORABLE GLENDA RUTH FOWLER BLAINE, Rod and Sally Blaine's daughter

 

BRUNO CZILLER, Vice Admiral, ISN (Ret.), former master of INSS MacArthur

 

DR. JACOB RUCKMAN, Astrophysicist

 

HIS EXCELLENCY BENJAMIN SERGEI SACHS, President of Imperial Traders
Association, and Chairman of Union Express

 

BARON SIR ANDREW CALVIN MERGER, newly appointed Viceroy and Governor
General of His Majesty's Realms Beyond the Coal Sack

 

ARKLEY KELLEY, Former Gunner, Imperial Marines, and Blaine family retainer

 

JENNIFER BANDA, Graduate Student in Xenobiology, Blaine Institute

 

IVAN, JOCK & CHARLIE, Motie ambassadors to the Empire, representing the
Mote Prime family headed by "King Peter"

 

CAPTAIN RAPHAEL CUNNINGHAM, ISN Intelligence case officer

 

ALYSIA JOYCE MEI-LING TRUJILLO, feature columnist Imperial PostTribune
Syndicate, Special Features reporter, Hochsweiler Broadcasting Network

THE HONORABLE KEVIN CHRISTIAN BLAINE, Lieutenant. ISN

 

COMMISSIONER JOHN CARGILL, Admiral, ISN (Ret.)

 

COMMISSIONER DAVID HARDY, Bishop of the Established Church, and former
Chaplain-Captain, Imperial Space Navy Reserve

 

LT. COMMANDER WILLIAM HIRAM RAWLINS, ISN, master of the frigate Atropos

 

COMMANDER GREGORY BALASINGHAM, ISN, master of the cruiser Agamemnon

 

THE HONORABLE FREDERICK TOWNSEND, owner and master of the yacht Hecate

 

TERRY KAKUMI, former Chief Petty Officer, ISN, engineer aboard Hecate

 

ADMIRAL THE HONORABLE SIR HARRY WEIGLE, Commander of the Crazy Eddie Fleet

 

The Moties:

 

Medina Traders Group:

 

EUDOXUS, Mediator

MUSTAPHA PASHA, Master of Inner Base Six

CALIPH ALMOHAD, Master of Medina Trading

 

East India Group:

 

LORD CORNWALLIS, Associate Master of Inner Base Six

WORDSWORTH, Junior Mediator

OMAR, Senior Mediator

ALl BABA, Apprentice Mediator

 

Crimean Tartars Group:

 

MERLIN, young Master

OZMA, senior Master

VICTORIA, Mediator

DOCTOR DOOLITTLE, Physician

POLLYANNA, Apprentice Mediator

 

Khanate Group:

 

HARLEQUIN, Mediator

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PART I SNOW GHOST

 

 

I would not spend another such a night Though 'twere to buy a world of
happy days, So full of dismal terror was the time!

 

-William Shakespeare, King Richard III

     

1 Interaction Nook

 

 

     0 God! I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a king of
infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.

 

-William Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act 2, Scene 2

 

 

     A severed head spun across black sky. He had been a Marine: square
jaw, close-cropped blond hair, glittering dead eyes. The slack mouth
tried to speak. "Tell them," it said. "Stop them." Vacuum made its skin
puffy, and blood made frozen bubbles on the thick neck. "Wake them. Wake
them up. Mr. Bury, sir, wake up," it said urgently. The sky swarmed with
small six-limbed shapes. They thrashed in the vacuum, found their
balance, and swain toward him, past him, toward the battleship Lenin.
Vacuum swallowed his scream. "Wake up," they chittered at him. "Please,
Excellency, you must wake up."

     His Excellency, Horace Hussein Al-Shamlan Bury, Trader and Magnate,
jerked and twitched and was sitting upright. He shook his head and
forced his eyes open.

     The small, dark man was standing a safe distance away. Bury said,
"Nabil. What time is it?"

     "It's two in the morning, Excellency. Mr. Renner insisted. He said
to tell you, 'The gripping hand.'"

     Bury blinked. "Is he drunk?"

     "Very. I woke Cynthia. She's making espresso for him. I made him
take vitamins and drink some water. He was attacked outside the house.
We killed all three, Excellency."

     "Careless." So: three corpses. At least Renner had some excuse for
waking him.

     "Mr. Renner was drunk and I was asleep when the alarms rang," Nabil
apologized. "Sir, they were using firearms."

     "All right. The gripping hand? Renner's been watching too many
holoflicks."

     "Yes, sir. Excellency, I should be seeing to things,"

     "Yes, the bodies. We'll want to know all about those. The gripping
hand?" Bury eased out of the water bed. His head spun with the motion,
and all his joints creaked in protest. "Ill be right down. Have coffee
for me, real coffee. Allah help you both if you woke me for nothing but
a mugging."

 

     Renner's fine new Spartan tunic was covered with blood, still wet.
He had trouble focusing his eyes. He was already talking as Bury took
Turkish coffee from Cynthia and sat down.

     "They were waiting outside," he said. "I sent the taxi off and
started for the door. Two stepped out of God knows where. One grabbed my
arms from behind. One sprayed Peaceable Sam in my face. I think that's
what it was; I didn't try to sniff it. Held my breath. Bit the alarm
tooth and ejected my sleeve gun and sprayed him back. He fell against
me. Sounded like popcorn going off all through his body. That's where
all the blood came from. The guy behind me, I sprayed his feet."

     Nabil was at a console, monitoring as one of Bury's agents began an
autopsy on the first of the dead muggers. He looked up to say, "Mr.
Renner had called in that he was coming, so the staff was waiting for
him, of course. When we heard the alarm they were ready."

     "Ready," Renner said. "Nabil, I haven't thanked you. Horace, he
deserves a bonus, Horace."

     Bury sipped at sweet Turkish coffee in a tiny cup. Renner gulped at
what Nabil had given him: evil black espresso, service for four in a
full-sized mug with a lemon slice floating it in. It popped his eyes
open and stood his hair on end.

     Bury winced, too, just watching. He said, "The gripping hand?"

     "The gripping hand. One hand, other hand, gripping hand. I've been
hearing it all night. I didn't haul you out of bed to tell you about a
god damned mugging."

     He could follow Bury's thoughts. Drunk. Not making sense. Then the
sense caIne through and the blood drained from Bury's dark face. Renner
said, "Hey!" and reached out to steady him.

     Bury brushed the hand off. "Report."

     Renner sat a little straighter. "I went out to look around, as
usual. Dressed fancy. Well-paid pilot to a billionaire trader, carrying
money and looking for fun. First-"

     "You were doing Renner."

     "It's the easy part of my job. Usually."

     "Go on."

     His lips felt numb and rubbery. Somehow he made them work. "On
Maxroy's Purchase a brothel is called an 'interaction nook.' I'd heard
about Ressina's. I went there. I didn't want their best girl; I wanted a
native. I came away with a lady named Belinda...

 

     Space is vast. Customs change, and every human colony is different.
Some slavishly imitate the manners of the Imperial court. Others try to
be like their Terran ancestors-or more likely, the way they've been told
their Terran ancestors were.

     The sun was setting somewhere behind the fog when they reached
Shibano's Sea Cave. Maxroy people kept early hours.

     Belinda was a pale blonde, tall, with a heart-shaped face. She had
a thick Maxroy's Purchase accent. "Oh, it's lovely! I've never been here
myself. You understand, you won't get a drink here?"

     Renner had in fact chosen the place. It was a Mormon-Japanese
restaurant. Maxroy's Purchase had first been settled by Mormons, and
they were still a fair percentage of the populace.

     Belinda was alarmed when he tried to order crottled greeps. "Do you
know what you're getting?"

     "I've read about this dish."

     'All right." And she grinned. "I'll help you."

     He'd had his doubts about alcohol-removed sake, but it tasted fine.
He could get drunk later. Renner often thought of himself as a
playboy-spy. Get the sense of the land, while Bury used his own means of
gathering information.

     Bury's means often startled him.

     Bury kept track of the flow of money through the Empire. Only that.
He was the same merchant prince he'd always been, with only this
difference: that for the past quarter of a century, he watched for Outie
maneuvering and kept the Navy informed.

     Outies were worlds outside the Empire of Man. Some were harmless,
some were not. Fifteen years ago, Outie piracy had been driven from
Maxroy's Purchase and from the system. It was to be expected that the
flow of money through the system would have dropped off. Only Bury would
have noticed that it had not decreased enough. Bury sold civilization;
and the Purchase was buying too much of it.

     And Bury had some time . . . and Imperial Autonetics owned three
ships here...

     The almond-eyed waiter was trying to hide a smirk when he brought
Renner's main course. The dish was conspicuous, a shallow bowl over a
foot across and five inches high. Customers at other tables broke off
conversation to watch as he set it in front of Renner.

     The creatures in the bowl might have been four-legged crabs. Their
sides pulsed. Renner remembered reading that they were land creatures.
They could almost reach the rim before they dropped back. Their eyes
were locked on Renner's as they climbed toward him. They looked hungry
and determined.

     "Pick up the crottling fork," Belinda whispered. "The two-pronged
fork. Use your thumb and two fingers."

     It was sitting beside the bowl. Renner picked it up. Belinda
whispered, "Stab just behind the head plate. Do it hard enough to set
the prongs. You don't want it to drop off."

     Hesitating was bad: the greeps would move. You couldn't Blaine
them. Renner stabbed one and lifted the fork. Belinda said, "Scrape it
off on the edge. You didn't stab hard enough. They bite."

     Renner scraped it off and tried another. The beasts weren't fast,

but it wasn't easy to center the fork. He stabbed.

 

     Good. Pick it up. Your left hand takes the tail. Pull hard."

     Renner pulled. The exoskeletal tail came right off, exposing two
inches of pale meat.

     All eyes were on Renner, to watch him make a fool of himself. The
naked tail writhed. Renner felt like a murderer. He said, "So, wretched
sand dweller! Now will you tell us of your troop movements?"

 

     "Actually, it was delicious. You really ought to try it," Renner said.

     Bury merely looked at him.

     "I've done this before, you know. Order something conspicuous, like
crepes suzettes. Get 'em looking at me, then pick a conversation. This
time I got the proprietor. He came over to lecture. 'Look at that greep.
See the shimmy? On the one hand, if they shimmy too hard, they may be
diseased. On the other, if they don't shimmy, they haven't eaten well.
On the gripping hand, if they're too young and healthy they will escape
and attempt to eat you. You would not like that.' I jumped a foot when
he stuck his hand in the bowl. He liked that. 'But look here, see how it
attacks my artificial finger. This is a healthy greep. Other places,
they will see a tourist, and they will serve anything. Not here. Lex
Shibano will not serve anything but healthy food. If it goes into your
body, it must be healthy. I would-''

     "Renner!"

     "Oh. Anyway, once Shibano came over, no one wanted to be near us. I
guess it's one of the hazards of eating there. When he went away, the
people at the next table had all lost interest. So I eavesdropped a
little. Pair of men to my right were bankers, I think."

     "I assume you'll get to the point sooner or later."

     Renner nodded. " 'We could sell out and take a capital gain. Then
again, the market's going up on Tabletop. We could hang on and make some
real money.' The other one said, 'On the gripping hand, inflation's
running wild on Tabletop. Let's get into something else.'

     Bury was getting older as he watched.

     "I talked to Belinda. She's got ambitions, but stupid. She . . .
see if I can get this right...

     Yes, Kevin, I could have spent my life as an honest housewife. Farm
life isn't bad if you can afford to keep up the machines but if I'm
careful and lucky, maybe I can get to Sparta. Get rich. Then start a
restaurant or something. What are my chances of getting to Sparta?'

     "I didn't want to lie to her, so-"

     "Go on."

     "I didn't say anything. She looked down at her plate and said, 'The
gripping hand is, I'll never be more than a Maxroy spill. The accent,
the way I walk . . . how high can I climb?' " Renner stopped to trickle
espresso past his tongue and chase it with half a glass of water.

     "Gripping hand," Bury prompted him.

     "I wanted a drink. I took her to the Top of the World. It's a
rotating bar and restaurant at the edge of the spaceport. The people at
the next table looked like prospectors. 'Prices are good for opal
meerschaum and we need the money.' Second guy said, 'I hear it's getting
harder to find blocks as large as we have. The price will go up.' The
first one said, 'Horace Bury landed on the Purchase yesterday. If
anybody can find the real source, he can. The gripping hand is, we'd
better sell our stock before the price drops.' Bury, it was everywhere!"

"More?"

     "I sent Belinda back to the interaction nook. She's looking for a
ticket out. She thought I was it. I thought I'd better send her back. A
car took off right behind the taxi. I didn't think anything of it, I
just tend to notice-"

"My training."

     "Right. I strolled on into the spill section. I wanted an overview,
and it really felt like I was onto something. That's where I got so
drunk. Local whiskey. Made from-"

     'Gripping hand'?"

     Renner sipped more espresso. 'Gah! They looked like hunters.
Smelled like hunters. Oh, I'm used to hunting snow ghosts. The furs sell
for a lot, and if you know their habits, they aren't so dangerous.' One
said, 'On the other hand, they did get Serge Levoy a month ago. You
think they're learning, maybe? Mutating?' Another one laughed and said,
'On the gripping hand, Page, you're too lazy to do anything else for a
living.'

     Bury shuddered. "Through the Coal Sack. The Mote is just onthe
other side of the Coal Sack. Moties must have come throughthe Coal Sack
in slower-than-light ships."

     "Not since we were there," Renner said. "Not enough time. And
before that-Bury, they couldn't use that lightsail trick through the
Coal Sack. Just sending that one ship to New Cal soaked up so many
resources it collapsed their whole civilization."

     "Gripping hand," Bury said. "Three alternatives, one dominant. Two
delicate right arms and a powerful left. People don't think that way.
Moties do! There's too much money on this planet. We were looking for
outies. Maybe it isn't outies. Maybe it's far worse than outies."

     "I don't believe it."

     "I don't want to." Bury grimaced. "It is a pity that Nabil had to
kill all three who attacked you. I think we might have learned something
interesting from them."

     Renner tried to look thoughtful and gave up. He finished the glass
of water. "How so?"

     "They wanted you alive. Not the actions of random muggers.
Peaceable Sam is a gas used by police, not sold to civilians. They were
skilled, and desperate, and had resources, but if they had been truly
skilled, they would have succeeded."

     "Desperate skilled amateurs," Renner said. "Who?"

     "I trust we will know in the morning."

     "Excellency?"

     Bury turned. "Do you have something, Nabil?"

     "The records office is closed and the computer is not responsive,
so we cannot check retinal pattern identifications tonight, but Wilfred
has made progress. Neither the first or second assassin had any trace of
darkening in the lungs, no alcohol or drugs in the bloodstream."

     "Look for caffeine."

     Nabil nodded and spoke to the console.

     "Mormons," Renner said. "Narrows it a bit. I'm about to fall over,
Horace."

     "To bed."

 

 

     Renner was naked in the sauna. Despite the water and vitamins he
had taken the night before, his head throbbed, and his stomach rejected
all notions of food. When cold air touched him, he bellowed, "Shut it!"

     Nabil smiled thinly. "You were more pleased to see me last night."

     "I was still drunk. What do you have?"

     "His Excellency wishes to see you. We have identified the
assassins. They are crew members from Nauvoo Vision."

"Nauvoo Vision?"

     "The name is Mormon. The ship belongs to Imperial Autonetics."

     Renner whistled. "To Bury? Why in hell would crew from one of
Bury's ships try to kill Bury's pilot?"

     "Not kill. Kidnap," Nabil said. He carefully closed the sauna door.

 

     "Nauvoo Vision," Bury said. "Captain Reuben Fox. A native of
Maxroy's Purchase. Mormon, and recruits Mormon crew."

     "Corruptible?" Renner asked.

     Bury shrugged. "I have never had reason to find out. It would be
worthwhile smuggling opal meerschaum if there were enough of it, but in
fact it is very rare. Nothing else this world exports carries a tariff."

     "What else do you know about him?"

     "Very little. I do not believe I have ever met him. My Sector
Commodore would have promoted him." Bury spoke softly in Arabic to his
pocket computer. "It might be worth learning why, but in fact the reason
seems clear enough. Fox has been a profitable captain."

     "I think we should talk with him," Renner said. "And I'd better
alert Navy Intelligence."

     Bury grimaced. "I suppose you are correct. Especially since there
may be Moties involved."

     "The Governor has to know, too."

     "I do not like government attention. Should I trust the Governor?
If somebody on this world is dealing with Moties...

     "You'll be meeting him tonight, for dinner. Horace, I was hunted
last night."

     Nabil looked up from his console. "That is true. It is clear
enough. They followed you, hoping to catch you alone or with only the
woman. You left a taxi waiting when you went to the Top of the World."

"Yes-"

     "We have located the driver. His cab was met at Madame Ressina's by
three men with an improbable tale. They lost interest when they
discovered that you were not in it."

     "They really were hunting me, then. My head still hurts."

     "It should, given what you drink," Bury said.

     "I take my nerve restoratives. Bury, why did they want me?"

     "I would presume for your keys," Nabil said, "and perhaps for
instructions on how to enter the house. They carried other drugs.
Serconal would have induced cooperation, or at least they must have
thought so."

 "That's illegal!" Renner protested.

     Bury laughed. "Serconal is not only illegal, it is tightly
controlled. It would be difficult for me to obtain a supply. Our enemies
have resources."

 

 

     Captain Reuben Fox was a dark-haired man approaching forty. He
sagged and jiggled as he walked. He didn't seem otherwise unhealthy.
Unlike Navy crew, civilians could neglect their freefall exercising, and
getting the muscle back was pure hell.

     He seemed to be hurrying, though he wasn't making much speed.
"Horace Bury! Your Excellency, I never expected that we would meet. What
brings you to-I mean, what can I do for you? I and my ship?"

     Bury wore his public, noncommittal smile. He appeared to be no more
than an old, bearded man with a very prominent nose and a soft smile,
all giving the lie to his reputation. "I often inspect ships I own. How
else may I know of problems in my organization?"

     "Excellency, I have no problems!"

     "I know. You have a good record, trouble free. Tell me a little
about normal operations of your ship."

     "Let us sit down." Fox dropped heavily into a chair. Bury was in
fact already seated. He was an old man, and he used a travel chair when
he could.

     Fox said, "We are an all-purpose cargo ship. What is often called a
tramp steamer. The name comes from the days before space flight. We take
orders for cargo to be brought here, and when we have sufficient cargo
or passengers to make the trip profitable, we go to Darwin. Sometimes we
go as far as Xanadu, and once to Tabletop, but generally only to Darwin."

     "And within this system as well, I suppose?"

     "Not often," Fox said. "If we have cargo within the Purchase
system, we can alter our course to the Jump point and use the finger."

     Bury had glanced through computer views of Nauvoo Vision on the way
here. The ship was versatile, a winged water-landing craft with
interstellar capability but no Langston Field. There were fittings for
an expanded passenger cabin or cargo hold, but either would have to be
added in orbit.

     The finger (or spit gun, or AWOL tube) was a linear accelerator. A
row of mountings ran the full length of the hull, and the
electromagnetic rings were stored on board. Flingers were common aboard
ships that ran a fixed route in heavily populated systems. They could
launch lifecraft, too. Nonetheless Bury asked, "Do you make much use of
the finger? Is it really worth carrying its mass?"

     "Yes, Excellency. Purchase system is short of metals. There's not
much in the way of mines. Not much in the way of asteroids, either, but
they'll last us the next ten thousand years. The mines have to be supplied."

     Bury had noticed, in his quick perusal of Nauvoo's records, that
rings and fittings in the finger had been replaced twice in thirteen
years. A fitting had lost alignment and was waiting for replacement at
this moment. Payments from the mines did back up Fox's claim of heavy use.

     "You have a full complement of crew?"

     "Three missing. I like to hire good Church members, but sometimes
they backslide. We're not supposed to drink alcohol, and most of us
never do, but everyone is curious."

     The Captain tended to explain before he was asked. It was the kind
of thing Bury noticed. "Have you been Mormon all your life?"

     "Not as you think Mormon," Fox said. "My ancestors had fundamental
differences with the Church on Earth. They came to Maxroy's Purchase to
establish the true faith That was some six hundred years ago. We were
fairly settled when the CoDominium sent us a hundred thousand
transportees. Evil men and women with evil habits. They brought alcohol
and drugs. The Church tried to keep control of the government, but there
were too many transportees. Too many for our missionaries to convert.
Some of the Elders took the true Church to the outback." Fox grinned
triumphantly. "When the Secession Wars began, the false temples in the
cities were destroyed, but the true Temple remained. It is the governing
Temple for Maxroy's Purchase to this day, our Temple in Glacier Valley."

     Bury nodded agreement. "It was much the same with the true servants
of Islam. They fled from cities to country, often from world to world.
Have I not heard of a New Utah?"

     "Excellency, I've read about New Utah in history class. It is an
outie world, settled from the Purchase at the same time that the Elders
moved to Glacier Valley. There were close relations with New Utah, until
the Alderson tram lines to it were lost sometime during the Secession
Wars. Stellar geometry changes slowly, but with enough time-"

     "Your crew is all Mormon, then?" Bury interrupted.

     "Yes, Excellency. I am a bishop of the Church. My crew is obedient
and cheerful. Don't our records show that?"

     "They do," Bury said. "It is not uncommon. What do you do when you
have passengers who are not of your church?"

     "I know many restaurant owners," Captain Fox said. "I find Church
members who are accustomed to serving gentiles, who would not want to be
permanent crew. They come for one voyage." He smiled. "They are eager.
What other chance has a restaurateur to see another sky? It may be
unusual practice, but it works."

 

     "In fact nothing about this ship or its practices is unusual. If
three of the crew of this ship had not tried to kidnap you, perhaps to
force their way into my bed chamber," Bury said, "there would be no
reason to be suspicious of Reuben Fox." Cynthia moved around Bury like a
tailor, dressing him. Bury stood to get his pants on, then sat again.

     Renner was already dressed, elegantly but without his usual
flamboyance. He sat down on the bed. "Uh-huh. Could those three have
been moonlighting? Back in port, looking for a little fun, someone
offers them money to break a kneecap. . . . No? I know that smile, Horace."

     "I tend to notice numbers."

     "Well?"

     "Small Small World, Mountain Movers, Cutty on the Rocks, and
others: these are the big asteroid mining concerns in Purchase system.
All old. Mountain Movers is over five hundred years old. They used
well-established techniques developed by the early GoDominium, and were
cautious about upgrading." Bury's fingers were dancing while he spoke.
Data flashed on-screen and were gone before Renner could quite integrate
them. "But what of these? Hannefin Mines, General Metals, Union
Planetoids, Tanner Metals. this sequence, seven in all. What do you see?"

     Unimaginative names."

     "I didn't notice that."

     "Short-lived. A few years each. Um . . . they are in sequence. One
disappears before the next is registered. Up to twenty years apart.
Bury, I don't see that any of them went bankrupt."

     "That would be the obvious assumption, would it not? A scam. Many
names, one man. But for a hundred and ten years? And evidently they paid
their bills on time. At least they've paid decent sums to Nauvoo Vision
for cargoes delivered across the system."

     "Taxes?"

     "They paid their taxes."

     "Offices were all here in Pitchfork River City. Check the
addresses." Renner watched Bury's fingers. Sometimes the old man's hands
shook; his servants learned to half-fill his cup so it didn't spill. But
Bury's hands became wonderfully agile on a computer keyboard. "What does
it mean?"

     "No such present address . . . none of them. I'll have Nabil search
out older records. It means I've been paid for nothing."

"Huh?"

     "I was joking. Nauvoo Vision's finger has seen hard use. Cargoes
have been launched across the system, but not targeted at asteroid
mines, not these mines. Where, then?"

     "There were extensive civilizations in the asteroids of Mote
system." Renner saw Bury's hands begin to shake and said, "Just a
thought. Outies is the way to bet. The rebels are back."

     "I do not bet the future of humanity at any odds, Kevin." Bury
leaned back, took a deep breath. "Well. We'll be a few minutes early for
dinner if we start now."

     "I gather that's the custom here."

     Yes. Let us see what we can learn at the Governor's Palace."

 

 

2 Receptions

 

     The first adventurer was a nuisance. I am sure he acted against his
mother's, his wife's, and the council of old men's strict orders when he
did it; but it was he that found where the mummoths die and where after
a thousand years of use there was still enough ivory to equip the entire
tribe with weapons. Such is the ultimate outline of the adventurer:
society's benefactor as well as pest.

 

-William Bolitho, Twelve Against the Gods

 

 

     The reception line was mercifully short. Governor Sir Lawrence
Jackson, a former Navy man who'd gone into politics. Lady Manssa
Jackson. Renner thought she looked Eurasian. Norvell White Muller, the
president of the local branch of the Imperial Traders Association. Half
a dozen other local officials.

     "Sir Kevin Renner," the protocol officer announced.

     "Welcome to Maxroy's Purchase, Sir Kevin," the Governor said.

     Actually, I don't use the title much, Governor. Thank you for the
reception. Glad to he here."

     "A bit tame for someone who has been to Mote Prime, I imagine,"
Lady Jackson said.

     There was something familiar about the Governor's voice, but before
Renner could study the Governor's face more closely, the people behind
him had moved up, and he was swept past the reception line and out into
the main hall.

     The reception hail was large and spacious. Between the big windows
that overlooked the city and the Pitchfork River were windows":
holograms of scenes from elsewhere on the planet.

     Here, half a dozen spectacular waterfalls plunged from orange
cliffs. Silver shapes leaped and danced in the pools below the falls.

     Here, a sea serpent chased a school of miniature dolphin shapes;
then the dolphins turned and attacked the serpent with vicious fangs.
The serpent dived to escape. The viewpoint followed it down . . .
followed and closed in, until the serpent's tail seemed about to plunge
out of the wall. The view shifted: the serpent was pulled tail first
onto the deck of a boat, imprisoned by a tethered collar

     Renner found himself next to a pretty girl in Imperial Navy
uniform. She seemed young to be a lieutenant commander. "Spectacular,"
he said.

     "Of course holograms for palace decorations went out of fashion on
Sparta ten years ago," she said. "Hello, Sir Kevin. I'm Ruth Cohen."

     One of the "windows" looked out on a sparse forest carpeted in
snow. Something like a thick-furred snake lifted a great, flattened head
. . . no, that was a neck! The creature itself was lying flat in the
snow, like a gigantic white bear rug. The narrow, pointed head lifted
high and rotated to look almost backward, suspiciously, straight into
the reception hall. Black-pupiled eyes bulged. The head settled; again
the animal was invisible in thick snow.

     "What ship, Commander?" Renner asked.

     She shook her head. "Governor's office. Intelligence liaison. She
glanced around to see that they were alone. "We would have met soon
enough anyway. I arranged to sit next to you at dinner."

     "Good." Purely business? "We'll have time to-God!"

     The pointed head snapped up, the flattened bear's short legs shot
backward, and it took off. It was fast. It might have been gliding,
using its flattened torso like an airfoil. Three muffled hunters fired
almost at the same moment, then turned and ran, dividing, dodging among
the trees. The creature smashed into a sapling, rebounded, and
collapsed. So did the tree.

     "Wow!" Renner said. "What was that?'

     "Snow ghost," Ruth Cohen said.

     "Dangerous

     "Oh, yes. The fur's quite valuable, though. They shed their furs in
the summer, but they're just as dangerous."

     "You don't have a Purchase accent," Renner said.

     She laughed softly. "You wouldn't believe what it cost my parents
to-" She grinned. "Actually, if I have a home planet, it's New
Washington. My father retired there. This is my first tour on Maxroy's
Purchase. I've been here a year."

     "Seems a nice place."

     "I'm glad somebody thinks so," Ruth said.

     "Governor Jackson. There's something familiar about him," Renner said.

     "Could you have known him? He was Navy Reserve for a long time.
Retired as a commander, I think."

     "How did he get to be Governor?"

     "It's an interesting story," she said. "Get me a drink and I'll
tell you.,,

     "Oh-sorry." Renner whistled to one of the circulating robots. "We
seem to have Old Fashioned, Martini, and something green."

     "I'll have the green one. It'll be waterwing liqueur. It's Sweet,
but there's a nice flavor."

     Renner took two of the green drinks and sipped carefully. It tasted
of ginger and something indefinable. "Not bad. I wonder if Bury knows
about this."

     "I'd be surprised if he didn't," Commander Cohen said. "It's a big
export item. Now. You wanted to know about the Governor. He grew up
here, was here before the Purchase was brought back into the Empire. He
joined the Navy from school, and when he got out of the Navy, he brought
a friend, another retired Navy man, Randall Weiss, and they started a
freighter service to supply the asteroid miners."

     "Sounds reasonable," Renner said. There had been a time when that
would have been his career: finish a tour in the Navy Reserve, then go
into a civilian shipping line, maybe eventually buy a ship.

     "Only the Outies kept raiding their ship," Ruth said. "They took
two cargoes, and the firm was about to go broke."

     "Where was the Navy?"

     "That was sixteen years ago."

     "Ah. They were still beefing up the blockade fleet." Mote system again.

     "Exactly." Ruth sipped at her drink. "That really is good, you
know? Anyway. Sir Lawrence-he wasn't Sir Lawrence then of course-and
Weiss decided to do something about it. They armed their ship and
recruited locals and asteroid miners and anyone else they could and went
out looking for pirates, or rather let the Outies find them. I guess
they were lucky because they captured an Outie ship, and that gave them
a bigger and better-armed ship, and they used it to hunt more Outies."

     "I think I read about that," Renner said. "Didn't realize it was
here. They ended up with four ships, and quite a battle."

     "Yes. Randall Weiss was killed, but they pretty well smashed the
Outie threat. Weiss got a statue, Sir Lawrence got a knighthood, and the
local council sent him to the sector capital to represent the Purchase.
Pretty soon the Viceroy sent him back as Governor."

     "Good story." Renner frowned. "By God, I have met him, but I can't
think where."

     A faint gong sounded through the reception hall.

     "Dinner," Ruth said.

 

     Renner offered his arm.

 

     The first course was a variety of sashimi. Renner looked to Ruth
Cohen for advice.

     "That one's yellowfin," she said. "Earth tuna grow well here. And
the light gray one is a freshwater fish called dancing silver. Oh!"

     "What?"

     "The dark red one is cecil. It's expensive. Not exactly rare, but
they don't catch one every day."

     Renner took some of each. "What is cecil?"

     "Big sea snake. You saw it caught, I think. In the holograms. Hmm.
Kevin, I think we've been watching our dinner! I wonder if that means
we'll have snow ghost?"

     "Yes," Lady Jackson said from down the table. She was an ample
woman who clearly liked to eat. "Do you like it?"

     "I've never tasted it," Ruth admitted. "We had cecil once, though.
Kevin, you're supposed to dip it in that sauce."

     Renner used the chopsticks to dip the dark meat, then chewed
thoughtfully.   "Peanut sauce."

     "And ginger," Lady Jackson said. "The Thai influence. Purchase
cuisine tends to be simple. The planet was settled by Mormons, but there
was strong oriental influence. The gripping hand was that we kept the
simplicities of both for nearly everything."

     Bury's travel chair, near the head of the table, took up the space
of two normal chairs. It gave him a sense of isolation, which he
welcomed, and still allowed him conversation.

     Snow ghost meat was served julienne with carrots, turnips, and
unfamiliar root vegetables. The dish was hot enough to wake the dead.
The meat was tough. No wonder if had to be cut fine. Bury's teeth cut
through it well enough, but they were harder and sharper than the teeth
he'd been born with.

     He asked, 'Maxroy's Purchase was brought into the Empire fifty
years ago?"

     "Not quite forty, actually," Governor Jackson said. He was eating
left-handed; his silverware had been laid out reversed.

     Bury nodded slowly. "But I am told there is still considerable
sentiment for the Outie cause."

     Governor Jackson spread his hands expressively. He never seemed to
shrug. "It's not what it seems," he protested. "Our people-especially in
the outback-tend to think of New Utah as more like Heaven than a mere
planet. Habitable from pole to pole, and covered with green plants and
wild game."

     "And it is not?" Bury asked.

     "I've read the old records," Governor Jackson said. "It's a planet.

More land surface than the Purchase, higher mountains, and even fewer
minerals close to the surface. Stayed molten longer, maybe. The
weather's more extreme. Do you care for more wine, Your Excellency?"

     "Thank you, no."

     Oh, that's right, Moslems don't drink," Mrs. Muller said. "I'd
forgotten."

     "Probably most do not," Bury said. "Just as most Jews do not eat
pork." He'd noticed that both the Governor and his wife were drinking
soda water.   "Governor, would there be strong reasons for the Outies to
wish for trade with the Purchase?"

     "Very likely, Excellency," Governor Jackson said. "New Utah is
quite deficient in certain minerals and organics. There's no selenium at
all, for example. They'll need food supplements."

     "Just a few tonnes a year," Norvell White Muller said. "A couple of
ships' worth, and the profits on those ships-" He licked his lips~."
Utah Churchies would buy medical supplies, too, if the Empire would let
them."

     Governor Jackson laughed. "The Navy can't spare me any ships," he
said. "So I can't go bring New Utah into the Empire by force-"

     "You can't even get there," Mrs. Muller giggled.

     "Well, we can, but I agree, it's not easy. Two jumps past wretched
red dwarfs, and then across a big bright E-class system with only one
planet and that a rock ball. There was an expedition a few years before
I got here." Jackson looked thoughtful. "The Navy has records showing it
wasn't always so hard."

     "I believe I heard that as well," Bury said.

     "Anyway, as long as I don't have Navy ships, the trade embargo is
the only weapon I've got to bring New Utah in. All they have to do is
join and they can have all the trade they want."

     "The gripping hand is they don't want to," Renner said.

     Jackson laughed. "Maybe. They've had time enough to change their
minds. It's all academic because the direct Jump point disappeared a
hundred and thirty years ago, during the Secession Wars. I sent them an
ambassador twelve years ago, with a trade ship. One of yours, Mister
Bury. No luck."

     Stars wander, Bury thought. Jump points depend upon the
luminosities within a pattern of stars. They come and go...why did that
thought suddenly have the fringe of hair around his neck trying to stand
up? Tiny six-limbed shadows flailed behind his eyes.

     Across the table he heard Renner murmur, "Jackson and Weiss?"

     Governor Jackson said, "There was some traffic, I think, up until
the Navy came back forty years ago. New Utah would have paid high for
fertilizer. But with what? And the trip is just too long-"

     Renner's belly laugh cut through all conversation. Into the silence
Renner said, "I was trying to remember where I met you."

     The Governor was laughing, too, with his head thrown back. His wife
giggled.

     "Governor? Sir? I watched your hands," Renner said. "Like this?" He
pushed back his chair and stood; never mind that they were in the middle
of dessert. Right hand up, closing: "On the one hand, high price for
fertilizer." Right hand dropped to near the hip, closed again. Bury
nodded. "On the other hand, they don't seem to have anything to pay
with," Renner said. Left hand out, fingers closed in pairs, like a hand
with three thick fingers. "Gripping hand, it's too far anyway. Did I get
that right?"

     "Why, yes, Sir Kevin. My wife's tried to break me of the habit-"

     "But the whole planet's doing it. Did you learn it here, or on Mote
Prime?"

     Bury's vision swam. He pulled the diagnostic sleeve out of his
chair arm and inserted his arm, hoping nobody would notice. Orange dots
blinked, and he felt the coolness of a tranquilizer injection.

     The Governor said, "I was sure you wouldn't recognize me. Couldn't
remember where you'd met me, hey? . . - Bury? Are you all right?"

     "Yes, but I don't understand."

     "You were an honored passenger, and Sir Kevin was the Sailing
Master, and Weiss and me, we were only Able Spacers. I was sure you
wouldn't know me. But we went down to Mote Prime, and we stayed till
Captain Blaine decided we weren't needed and sent us back. Weiss, he
picked up that habit from the aliens, the Moties. One hand, other hand,
gripping hand, and they shrug with their arms because their shoulders
don't move. I learned it from him. We were on the holoscans a lot when
we were fighting the Outies, and I've been on since Sparta made me
Governor, and I guess. The whole planet, eh?"

     Renner said, "All of Pitchfork River, at least. Top to bottom, hill
to spill, they've taken up that three-sided Aristotelian logic. You're
not just the governor, you're a holo star too."

     The Governor seemed embarrassed, but pleased. "That's the way it is
in the outlying worlds. Sir Kevin, Excellency, I was purely delighted to
meet you again after so long." As equals, he didn't say.

 

 

     "So that's all there was to It," Renner said. He sprawled back in
the big RelaxaChair in Bury's study and let the massage begin as he
lifted a glass of real cognac. "Jackson and Weiss got successful and
become tri-vee stars. Local boys made good. So everybody copied them.
Wow! And to think we knew them when." He laughed suddenly. "Weiss must
have driven his Fyunch(click) crazy, imitating him like that! It's
supposed to go the other way around"

     "Naive." Bury let himself sink cautiously into his touched the
button twice for coffee.

     "How so naive? You heard the Governor."

     "I heard him explain away a peculiar habit," Bury said softly. I
did not hear an explanation of why there is too much money this system."

"That's true," Rennet admitted.

     "He has been to Mote Prime," Bury said. "The Governor himself. He
and Weiss had money to buy and outfit a spacecraft. If there ever was a
man better suited to hide captured Watchmakers. Or an Engineer, or-"

     Rennet laughed. "Bury, that's bizarre!" He leaned back into the
massage chair and let it work as he remembered the miniature Moties.
Small aliens, not really intelligent, but able to manipulate
technologies beyond anything Renner had ever seen. Oh, they'd have been
valuable, all right! And they'd destroyed the battle cruiser MacArthur

     Still. "Horace, you've been clinically paranoid since long before I
met you. Blaine let the Watchmakers get loose on his ship, but Christ,
it was impossible to get Moties into Lenin! The Marines didn't let
anything through unless it went through molecule-by-molecule inspection!"

     "Not impossible. I did it myself." Bury's hands kneaded the chair arms

     Rennet sat bolt upright. "What?"

     "It would have worked." Bury waited as Nabil came into the room
with an ornate silver coffeepot and thin cups. "Coffee, Kevin?"

     "Sure. You smuggled out a Motie?"

     "We did that, didn't we, Nabil?"

     Nabil grinned mirthlessly. "Excellency, that is one profit I am
pleased that you never collected." It was a liberty Nabil would not
normally have taken; but Bury only shivered and sipped at his coffee. He
was wearing the diagnostic sleeve

     'Bury, what in hell?"

     "Have I shocked you after twenty-five years? The Watchmakers were
potentially the most valuable thing I had ever seen," Bury said. "Able
to fix and repair and rebuild and invent. I thought it madness not to
keep a pair. And so we arranged it, a pair of Watchmakers in suspended
animation, hidden in an air tank. My air tank on my pressure suit."

     "On your back?" If Bury was lying, he was doing it well. But Bury
did lie well. "You don't have Watchmakers. I'd know."

     Of course I do not," Bury said. "You know part of the story.
MacArthur was lost to us, the Watchmakers were running wild throughout
the ship, changing the machines for their own use, killing Marines who
peeped into their nests. We crossed on lines between MacArthur and
Lenin. Long spiderwebs of line with passengers strung like beads. The
universe was all around us and the great globe of Mote Prime below, all
circles, the craters left by their wars. The huge globe of a ship came
near. I could feel the wealth and danger on my back, Marines ahead, and
the risk of running out of air too soon. I had accepted that risk. Then-"

     "Then you looked back. Like Orpheus."

     "The sun happened to shine directly into the faceplate of the man
behind me."

     "You saw tiny eyes-"

     "The djinni take you, Kevin! It's my nightmare, after all! Three
pairs of tiny eyes looked at me out of the faceplate. I hurled my
briefcase at them. I reached around and wrenched one of my air tanks
loose and hurled it after. The suit dodged-clumsy, it was a wonder they
could get it to move at all-dodged the briefcase and was in perfect
position when the air tank smashed the faceplate."

     "I've had this nightmare twice myself, I've heard it so often.
Bury, it would have served you right if you'd grabbed the wrong air tank."

     "It was not the worst of my fears. The faceplate smashed and a
score of Watchmaker class Moties blew out and thrashed in the vacuum,
and with them came a tumbling head. That was how they got past the
Marines. And I would have taken that air tank past Lenin's Marines."

     "Maybe."

     "And maybe I was not the only one. Two Able Spacers were on Mote
Prime. We all saw how useful Watchmakers were when properly used by the
Engineer class of Moties. Did one of them find yet another way to
conceal Watchmakers? Or Engineers or Masters?"

     "It's hard to disprove, Bury, but you really don't have any reason
for thinking so. By the way, don't tell that story to anyone else."

     Bury glared. "I haven't told you for twenty-five years. Kevin, we
do have something useful. If this three-hand way of thinking spread
because there are Moties around-of whatever class-then I know who is
guilty. The Governor says that he and his companion spread that. He
would be lying, covering up."

     "Maybe not. He might really believe-"

"Kevin-"

     "Or maybe it was Weiss. All right, all right. We still don't know
about the money flow. We don't know where the cargoes went when Captain
Fox used his flinger. We need to find out."

     "You must report to the Navy first. In case we should disappear."

     "Right. And then I'll find a way to chase Outies, and you find a
way to chase Moties, and I'll be in Scotland before ye. Now I'm going to
bed. When I was in the sauna, I swore I'd go to bed sober."

"...Yes."

 

 

3 The Maguey Worm

 

 

Men have died from time to time, and worms have eatenthem, but not for love.

 

Shakespeare, As You Like it, Act 4, Scene I

 

 

Ruth Cohen led the way downstairs into the cellar of Government House.
Two Marines were seated at the far end of a long, blank walled corridor.
One stood to attention. The other remained at his console.

     Identity, Commander, please' lie waited as Ruth stared into a
retinal pattern reader and put her hand on the Identiplate.

     "Ruth Cohen. Lieutenant Commander, Imperial Navy. Unrestricted
access to security systems," the box said.

     "Now you, sir."

     "It won't know me," Renner said.

     "Sir..."

     "I know the drill, Sergeant." Renner looked into the box. A red
light danced about in his eyes.

     "Pattern recorded. Subject unknown," the box said.

     The Marine touched buttons on his console. A door swung open to
reveal a small antechamber that looked much like an airlock. As Renner
and Cohen entered the antechamber, the Marine dictated, Lieutenant
Commander Cohen and subject identified as Kevin Renner, civilian,
Imperial Autonetics, entered security rooms .

     The inner door opened when the outer door was closed and locked.
Renner couldn't help thinking of the weapons the Marines could use on
them while they were locked into the comfortably furnished suite. There
was a conference table, good chairs, and a couch, all identical to
security rooms Renner had seen on a dozen planets. "Seems like home' he
said.

     Ruth Cohen held herself stiffly. She set her recorder on the table
and wiped her palms on her skirt. Renner read her nervousness. "You all
right?"

     Maybe I don't interview captains all that often.'

     Renner grinned. Don't look like one, do I? There's a price for
this, you know."

"What?"

     "You'll have dinner with me tonight."

"Captain..."

     "What are they going to do, fire me?" Renner demanded. He made
faces at the recorder, which wasn't on. "That for you. And no report
until Commander Cohen agrees to go out with me."

     "Suppose I refuse?"

     Renner stared. "Then I make my report."

     "Oh." She smiled enchantingly. "In that case, I'd be delighted to
have dinner with you."

     "Hot damn! How do you feel about-"

     "I won't touch crottled greeps. Why is it everyone who's seen a
crottled greep wants to watch someone else coping? Captain, does it
strike you that you and I shouldn't be seen together very much?"

     "You're right," Renner said. "Heckfire."

     So I guess that's that." She sat at the table. "Ready? Okay.
Recorder's on." She dictated date and time. "Report of Kevin Renner,
Captain, Imperial Navy Intelligence. Case officer, Lieutenant Commander
Ruth Cohen..."

     Renner waited until she had finished the introduction and header,
then sat at the table. "Captain Sir Kevin Renner, KCMG, Navy
Intelligence, Special Assignment. As stated in previous reports, we
brought the Imperial Autonetics yacht Sinbud to Maxroy's Purchase
because of the suspicions of His Excellency Horace Hussein al-Shamlan
Bury, Magnate. Bury's financial analysis indicated there might be
irregularities. Imperial Autonetics has a startup factory here, and owns
three ships, so there was no problem about cover stories.

"Two days after we arrived there was an attempt to kidnap me-"

     Ruth Cohen involuntarily drew in a deep breath.

     Renner grinned. "Glad you care." He leaned back in his chair and
stared at the ceiling for a moment, then began to talk. He told about
the attack, then what had preceded it.

"...healthy greep. Look how it shimmies.' Commander, if you keep
laughing in the middle I'll never get done."

     "That's not fair!''

     "Sure it is." Renner continued with his night in the capital. At
appropriate points he inserted recordings of what they had found out
about the three attackers, Captain Reuben Fox, and the history of Nauvoo
Vision.

     "Mormons," Ruth Cohen said. "Three of them, It's hard to believe
they're ordinary robbers."

     "Yeah, I noticed that," Renner said. "One Mormon going bad is
unfortunate. Three at once is a conspiracy. Not to mention that Bury is
sure that Captain Fox is covering up."

     "General conclusions?" Ruth prompted.

     Of my own, none, but His Excellency Horace Bury believes there may
be Moties loose in the Purchase system. I do not. I think the Outies are
back."

     Ruth nodded grimly. "I don't think I believe in Moties either," she
said. "But the regulations are clear enough. This interview gets off to
Sector Headquarters soonest. Discussion?"

     "Bury's paranoid," Renner said. "He always sees a Motie threat. But
he could be right, and if he is, the Governor's in a conspiracy against
the Empire."

     "Captain, this report will go directly to Sector Headquarters. They
may not know about you and His Excellency."

     Renner grinned. "Okay. Horace was born rich. His father made a
massive fortune in interstellar trade after the Empire annexed Levant.
Bury extended it. He's a hundred and sixteen years old, and he
understands the flow patterns of money. A powerful force in the Empire
is Horace Bury."

     "He . . . um. He committed acts which put him afoul of Empire law,
details classified, twenty-six years ago. We had both visited Mote Prime
as part of the official expedition. I was just getting out of the Navy,
having served as Sailing Master of the INSS battle cruiser MacArthur of
ill fame."

     "The only ship ever destroyed by aliens," she remembered.

     "Other than blockade battles," Renner said. "But essentially yes.
MacArthur was destroyed by Motie Watchmakers. It's a class of Motie
animal. Not intelligent, and they have four arms, not three, All kinds
of people have speculated about that, including the Moties at Blaine
Institute. Anyway, I was getting out, and Bury was facing a hangman's
noose. He made a deal. For twenty-five years he's been holding down
rebellion and Outie action all across the Empire, largely at his own
expense, and I'm the guy the Navy assigned to watch him. He's dedicated,
too. I've never caught him doing anything that would get in the way of
his mission." Except once, he remembered.

     "Why Outies? Vengeance? Outies gored his ox?"

     Renner sighed. "Horace doesn't give a damn about Outies. Outies
take up time and resources. Anything that distracts the Empire from
dealing with Moties is a threat to the human race and the children of
Allah. Moties frightened Horace once. Nobody does that twice. Horace
wants them extinct."

     Ruth Cohen looked puzzled. She glanced at the recorders. Captain,
if the Moties did break out, would they be that big a threat?"

     "I don't know," Renner said. "It's not impossible. It isn't that
their technology is so much better than ours, as that their instinct for
technology is beyond anything we know. Humans are better at science, but
once the principles have been discovered, the Moties-the Browns, anyway,
the Engineers-are better at turning them to practical use than any
humans who ever lived.

     "Example. They'd never heard of the Langston Field when we arrived
at Mote Prime, and before we left their system they'd made improvements
we never thought of! Another example: the magic coffeepot we got off
MacArthur. By now that technology is all over the Empire, even here. I'm
sure some variant of the coffeepot is used to get the alcohol out of the
sake I was drinking night before last."

     "Thank you. Have you other observations?"

     "Yeah. My own plans. Bury's paranoia can be useful sometimes, but I
don't like seeing him so nervous. He might do something hasty. Anyway, I
trust he'll be busting his arse to find what he thinks are Moties. That
leaves me free to track Outies, if that's what we're facing. I want to
show Bury that the Moties are still safely bottled up.

     "We can't trust anyone but Bury's people, so we don't have any

troops. Can't use the local cops. But there are some . . . mmm, avenues.
Where has Captain Fox been sending his cargo pods? Is there an Outie
base in the asteroids? Why the peculiar flow of money? Imperial
Autonetics is constantly being picked at by embezzlers. Robbing a
corporation, it's like robbing a machine, for some people. Here, it
doesn't look like anyone's being robbed,"

     She was smiling again. "Is that bad?"

     'Well ... it's odd. Something is hidden but nobody's being robbed."

     "What will you do?"

     "I'll do Renner," He grinned at her, "I'll spend money. I'll make
passes at pretty girls, and ask shopkeepers about whatever they're
selling, and buy people drinks and generally get them talking. Maybe . .
. yeah, maybe I'll look into where opal meerschaum comes from,"

     She was looking at him, frowning. Alone?"

     "More or less. I'll keep Bury's household posted as best I can.
This is what I do,"

     "Anything else to report?"

     Renner shook his head, and Ruth turned off the recorders. "I always
did wonder about the regulations about Moties," she said. "What do we do
now?"

     "First, you get this recording off to Sector. You do understand
that no one on this planet sees it first?"

     "Give me a little credit-"

     "Oh, I've always known that beauty and brains go together. There
are implications, you know."

     "Lots of them," Ruth said. "Kevin, have you thought this through?
The True Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter Day Saints has power. And
a lot of members. If you're threatening it..."

     "They'll have plenty of gunmen. Sure. Now think about what we could
be doing to threaten that Church,"

     "I did. So far I got nothing."

     "Me either," Renner said. "So I'll keep poking around."

 

     Shopping centers had never come into vogue on the Purchase. Big and
little shops were scattered through the city, a sudden surprise among
the houses,

     Here: four huge rock slabs leaned against each other at the tops,
with window glass in narrow triangles where the rock didn't meet. The
boutique was a block from the Pitchfork River, in a neighborhood that
had once been fashionable and was now getting to be again. Kevin Renner
glanced in and saw a squarish chunk of white rock glittering with opal
colors.

     He walked in. Chimes sounded above his head,

     He paid little attention to the cookware, lamps, rifles. Here was a
row of glittering white pipes with amber bits, and one, isolated, that
was fiery opal in a black matrix, Some were carved in intricate fashion:
faces, animals, and one flattened tube shaped like an Imperial
skip-glide fighter,

     A short, muscular, balding man emerged from somewhere aft. His eyes
scanned Renner in genial fashion, He said, "The pipes."

     "Too right. What kind of prices do these things carry? The black
one, for instance,"

     Oh, no, sir. That's a used pipe. Mine. After I close up, then it
comes out of the case. It's there for display."

     "Um. How long..."

     The old man had it out on the counter. It had been carved into a
face, a lovely woman's face. Long, wavy hair ran down the bit. "I've
been smoking Giselle here for twenty-six years. But it doesn't take that
long. A year, year and a half, the matrix will blacken up nicely. Longer
for the larger pipes."

     "Longer if I like switching pipes, too. How-"

     "You'll find you smoke just the one pipe at home, sir. Opal
meerschaum doesn't go stale after a few thousand puffs. Briar is what
you'll take on trips."

     Interesting. You took the cheaper pipes on trips, of course, and
the little ones. Big pipes were more awkward but smoked better. But most
of the pipes in view were pocket-size.

     "Do you keep the bigger ones somewhere else?"

     "No, sir, this is all we have,"

     "Mmm, That big One?"

     "Nine hundred crowns." The proprietor moved it to the counter. It
was an animal's head, vaguely elephantine.

     "That's high. I've seen better carving," Renner said,

     "On opal meerschaum?"

     Well, no. Is it difficult to carve?"

     The old man smiled. "Not really. Local talent. It may be you'd want
to buy a blank, like this." It was bigger yet, with a bowl bigger than
Renner's fist and a long shank and short bit. "Take it to another world.
Give it to a better carver."

     "How much?"

     "Thirteen fifty."

     It wasn't Kevin's money. Very little of what passed through his
fingers was Kevin's money. There would be a Navy pension, and he might
be in Bury's will . . . but this would be charged to expenses.
Nonetheless Kevin shook his head and said, 'Wow."

     "Higher on other worlds. Much higher. And the value goes up as you
smoke it," The man hesitated, then said, Twelve hundred."

     "Would you go a thousand?"

     "No, Look into some other stores. Come back if you change your mind."

     "Rape it, Sell me that, Do you have tobacco, too?" Kevin handed
over his pocket computer and waited while the proprietor verified the
transfer, wrapped the pipe, handed it across. And added a tin of local
tobacco, gratis.

     Kevin knew what he wanted to ask next . . . and suddenly knew that
he didn't have to. He just grinned and let silence stretch until the old
man grinned back and said, "Nobody knows."

     'Well, how does it come in?"

     "Private fliers. Men go out and come back with the stone. Are you
thinking that they could be made to talk?"

     'Well . . .

     There are criminal elements in Pitchfork River. They don't control
the opal meerschaum and never have. My suppliers say they don't know
where it comes from; they always bought it from somewhere else. I've
heard it so often I'm beginning to believe it. I helped finance some
geologists once, when I was younger. They never found anything. Money
into a rat hive."

     "Too bad."

     'You won't find a shop that sells only the opal meerschaum. It's
sporadic. There hasn't been a new source in twenty years, that's why
it's so high. Some of us think it comes from the north. The north is
more geologically active, and the fliers mostly go out in that direction."

 

     But he was willing to bargain," Renner told his pocket computer,
set to RECORD. "Two other dealers offered me deals, too, That's three
out of four. I think they're expecting a new source anytime now. That
would drop the price. It would fit the cycles you noticed, slow rise in
price, peak, steep drop, every twenty years or so."

     He put the computer away. The taxi settled and let him out. He was
in a narrow wedge of manicured forest, in Tanner Park, and a bridge was
in view of the north.

     Across the bridge: the spill. It wasn't quite a slum; but the
houses crowded too close, and potholes and broken lightstrips weren't
repaired at once, and the crime rate was high. Renner hadn't wanted to
get out of a taxi here. He strolled through the streets, looking for
what there was to see.

     That sign: THE MAGUEY WORM, on a tall concrete building painted in
garish murals. Surely that was where he had fried his brains, night
before last? Not that it mattered much. Renner went in.

     Midafternoon. Not much of a crowd: four at the bar, two at a big
table, all men. Working men, by their look: comfortable, durable
clothes. Renner ordered waterwing liqueur and settled back to soak up
atmosphere.

     There are those who prey on tourists. But nobody made a move. He
might have been invisible, Renner unwrapped his package. Carefully he
filled the bowl of the pipe with tobacco, then lit up.

Staring is a universal insult, and nobody was; but others had become
aware of his existence, Renner said aloud, "The old guy was right.
That's a terrific smoke." It was true.

     "I wouldn't know," the bartender said, and a brawny guy two chairs
down said, "Amen." He was wearing several layers of clothing, like the
hunters of two nights ago. Geared for cold, wearing it all because it
was the easiest way to carry it,

     Renner looked disconcerted. "Oops. I should have asked-"

     "Smoking's allowed in the Maguey Worm," The bartender jerked his
thumb upward, at the high ceiling and slowly turning fans. Go ahead,
it'll give the place a bit of class. I'm told you should be drinking
skellish with that, for the taste. Or B and B."

     "Pour me a skellish, then, bubble on the side. A round for the
house. You, too."

     "The house thanks you," the bartender said. "Amen," said six
customers, and the house became busy.

     One of the hunters raised his glass to Renner. "You were in
here-what, two nights ago?"

     "Wednesday," the bartender said, "We don't get a lot of offplanet
trade here," His voice was friendly, but it held a question.

     Renner shrugged.

     The hunter came over to Renner's table. "Mind?,.. Thanks." He sat
and looked pointedly at Renner's pipe. He sure ain't broke,"

     Renner grinned. "I got lucky once," The trick is to imply that
anyone can get lucky. "I'm a rich man's pilot. I can play tourist when
I'm on a planet, while Bury busts his ass making more money."

     "You want local color, you came to the right place. I'm Ajax Boynton."

     "Kevin Renner,"

     "Sir Kevin," Boynton said. "Saw you on tri-vee. Hey, fellows, we
got a celebrity."

     Renner grinned. "Pull up a chair. Tell me tall tales." He waved to
the bartender, who had politely moved out of earshot, "Another round."

     Four more joined him. Two ordered straight orange juice. It cost as
much as liquor. They introduced themselves as the Scott brothers, James
and Darwin,

     "I take it things are slow?" Kevin asked,

     "A little," Darwin Scott said. He shrugged massive shoulders. "Snow
ghost hunting's a chancy thing. Get a good one and you make money, but
you don't always."

     "Then what?"

     "Then you wait for somebody to stake you," Ajax Boynton said. "You
looking to invest some money?"

     Renner looked thoughtful. "Truth is, I'd like to own a snow ghost
fur and I'd like to shoot it myself. What would it cost me?"

     "Five thousand buys a quarter share," Boynton said. "Ten thousand
buys forty percent."

     "Why-"

     'With ten thousand worth of gear we have a better chance of getting
a ghost."

     "Oh. Plausible."

     "Still interested?"

     "Sure, if I get to come along."

     Boynton looked annoyed. "Hunting ghosts isn't dude work. We lose
people."

     "You keep saying that. With IR gear, and-"

           "And sonar, and the best damn acoustic gear we can come up
with," James Scott said, "And we lose people, because it's a long way
north, the aurora mucks up electronics. And-"

     "And ghosts move fast," his brother said. They dig in near tree
roots, where you can't get a good sonar map. They stay down in the snow
so the IR doesn't spot them, And they can swim under snow faster than
you can walk. Forget it, Mister,"

     "Let's see, now. I back you for ten thousand worth of gear, which I
leave behind when the ship lifts, A good ghost fur costs...what?

Straight from you, no retailer."

     Darwin Scott said, "I'd get around twenty thousand."

     Renner's sources were accurate. So call it another twenty thousand
when I get back, and call that incentive to bring the greenhorn back
alive. Total, thirty thousand." They were trying to maintain poker
faces, but he surely had their interest. 'Just that, and you keep your
sixty percent, but I expect you to indulge yet another whim."

     Three men sighed. Renner said, "See, I can't think of any reason
not to hunt snow ghosts where I might stumble across some opal
meerschaum, too."

     Three men were hiding smiles, Ajax Boynton said, "Me neither. If
you've got a place in mind, I'll tell you if there are snow ghosts there."

     "Let's find a map."

 

4 Snow Ghost

 

 

     Have you not seen how your Lord lengthens out the shadow?

     He could have kept it motionless if he liked.

Yet We make the sun its pilot to show the way.

 

-al-Qur'an

 

 

 

 

     Is this wise?" Bury sipped at coffee and examined the map projected
on the wall. "It will certainly not be comfortable."

     Renner shrugged. I like comfort. But hey, if I can get a snow ghost
fur, it'll sure keep me warm enough."

     So will synthetics, and they are much cheaper. Why the area between
the glaciers?"

     Oh, Hell, Bury. How do you know Reuben Fox is hiding something but
he isn't stealing and can't be bribed? Brains and instinct and
technique. It took me all afternoon. We talked. The Scott brothers
switched from orange juice to tea ... the Maguey Worm has a magic
coffeepot variation. Gilbey makes a liter of tea and then lets the
caffeine filter out through the wall. Takes five minutes."

     "More Motic influence."

     "Right off of your ships, Horace! Anyway I pointed at various parts
of the map, all of it in the region where the northern lights play, but
that's fairly large. Snow ghosts? Yes. No. Maybe. They'd never live
here, they've been hunted out there, my brother got one here a year ago."

     "I wish you had a fast-forward switch, Kevin.''

     "By and by, Boynton said he'd heard opal meerschaum came

from under the Hand Glacier. The Scott brothers said it didn't, it had
been searched by an uncle or something, and besides, the place had been
hunted out of snow ghosts twenty years ago. So I went on pointing, and
every place I pointed, the Scott brothers thought I might find a snow
ghost there."

 

     "There's something in the Hand. The Mormons know about it and
Boynton doesn't. For that matter, it might be opal meerschaum. Under the
glacier. You wait till the glacier moves; that's why the market's so
sporadic."

     "Given the geology I would not be surprised, but what is that to you?"

     Renner spread his hands. "One hand, it's cold and miserable. Other
hand, the source of opal meerschaum is a big secret, and we're looking
for secrets. Gripping hand-" Bury suppressed a shudder. 'Gripping hand,
they're interested. What is Horace Bury after? Opal meerschaum?
Something else?"

     "And you trust your companions, whom you met in a bar-"

     "I had Ruth Cohen check on them. Boynton and the Scott brothers are
well known, no trouble with the police except that Boynton gets drunk
when he has a good hunt. The Maguey Worm is one of half a dozen places
where ghost hunters hang out looking for a. stake."

     "Still-?"

     "You have a better lead?"

     "I have leads. And a different manner of searching." Bury gestured
to indicate his travel chair. "Certainly you are better suited to follow
this than I am. Kevin, communications will not be reliable in that area.
The crew on Sinbad can attempt to keep track of you, but it is not
likely they will succeed."

     "No guts, no glory." Renner grinned. "Besides, I'll have Boynton
and the Scott brothers looking out for me. They each get an extra five
thousand if I get back alive. Ten each if I have a snow ghost. What can
go wrong?"

 

     The glacier ended in sharp edges bordered in bare rocky ground. The
bare spots ranged from a few meters to several kilometers before
vanishing into the snow. They flew past a cluster of buildings nestled
against the glacier edge. Two buildings stood out, one wide and low, the
other taller amid more massive. Mist and steam rose from all the
clear-ground areas to the thick cloud cover above them, so that it was
hard to see the town,

     "Zion," Ajax Boynton said.

     "Looks interesting," Renner said. Maybe four thousand population,
maybe less.

     "For us," Darwin Scott said. "That's one of the True Temples. But
there won't be any ghosts near there. No opal meerschaum, either."

     "Not there," Boynton agreed. "But that stuff's got to be near

here somewhere."

     "Why?"

     "We know the jade comes from here."

     "We know people say so," James Scott said. 'But I never met anyone
who'd found any."

     "You have, too," Ajax Boynton said. "Ralph. Ralph . . . hell, I
forget. Came to the Maguey and bought for the house."

     "Yeah, and the next day bought a ticket for Tabletop," James Scott
said. "I'd forgotten him. Okay, so you can get lucky."

     'Never did understand that," Boynton said. Ralph-Plemmons, that was
his name. I didn't know him all that well, but I sure never figured him
to leave the Purchase." He looked down at the map display on the flier's
navigation screen. "Fifteen more klicks south, then twenty east. I know
a good place."

     Renner studied the rugged ground below. It rolled with hills,
mostly covered with thin forest. Those bumbershoot trees needed a lot of
room. The area near the glacier was obscured with mist, but away from it
the air was clearer. Brush and treetops thrust up through the snow in
the clearings. "Just where do you land?" he asked.

     "You land on a lake," Darwin Scott said. He touched the light pen
to the area Boynton had indicated. The bush plane banked slightly and
changed course. "A shallow lake."

     "Why shallow?" Renner asked.

     'Snow ghosts aren't the only things that eat people," James Scott
said. Boynton here lost a partner to a freshwater cecil. You sure this
isn't the same lake?'

     "Hell, no. I told Brad that lake was too deep," Boynton said.

     Fifteen minutes later James Scott took manual control of the plane.
He brought it in low and circled a patch that was clear of trees.

     All three hunters used binoculars to study the lake. The snow cover
was undisturbed. "No blow holes," Boynton said. "Looks okay."

     Scott brought the plane in low and let it settle onto the frozen
lake. He circled the perimeter several times before he taxied out to the
lake's center. "You want to flatten the snow," he said. "All around your
camp. Pack it tight."

     "Whose partner got eaten in his sack?" Renner asked.

     They just looked at him. "Nobody's that stupid," Boynton said. The
Scott brothers unfolded the tent and inflated it. It was larger than the
flier. Darwin Scott said, "Ajax, are you trying to break the man?"

     "Actually, I bought it," Renner said. "It looked comfortable."

     Darwin Scott looked at the tent and laughed. His breath made a
thick plume in the cold air. "Comfortable. Renner, you're not supposed
to be comfortable when you hunt snow ghosts."

 

     Renner's pocket calculator beeped softly to indicate that Sinbad
would be overhead. He held the calculator to his ear, but there was only
static. Renner shrugged and spoke into it. "I don't expect anyone to
hear me. Nothing to report. We're on snow buggies about thirty klicks
from camp, and we haven't seen a thing. There are a lot of caves under
the glacier edge. Too many. It would take a year to explore them.

     "Nobody cares if we go toward Zion, except Boynton gets disgusted
at how candy ass I am wanting to go to a town instead of hunting a
ghost. I told him if there was an opal meerschaum source, there had to
be people nearby. So I'm looking for a town bigger than it should be.

     "But when we start to go much more than forty kilometers south of
Zion, the Scott brothers start to twitch. That's where we found that
interesting fissure in the Hand Glacier. Could be just my imagination,
of course."

     Renner put the computer back in the pocket of his parka and gunned
the snow buggy to catch up closer to Darwin Scott. The wind was cold on
his face. He pulled the parka up tighter around his nose, adjusted the
goggles, and wondered if he'd ever be warm again despite the electric
heaters in his boots and gloves.

     His suspicions were starting to feel silly, and he didn't know why.
Attitude problem. So what if it's a blind alley? Keep smiling, pretend
you're having fun. Get yourself a fur. Impress Commander Cohen.

     They drove south for another fifteen minutes, then Scott slowed to
a stop. When Renner pulled alongside, Scott took out snowshoes.

     "We take it slow from here. And no talking." Scott pointed to the
forest edge a kilometer away. "Maybe in there. Good ghost country."

     "Wouldn't they hear us coming?"

     "They heard," Scott said. "They'll be watching. Most will run away
from two guys with rifles. They'd all run from four."

     "They can tell we're armed?"

     Scott shrugged. "Some say so. I believe it."

     "You said most will run."

     "A hungry one might not. Now, no talking. They don't like talk.
Don't know why."

     It took Renner a few minutes to get the hang of snowshoes. These
were shorter and wider than skis. Renner learned to walk with a shuffle,
using the poles to help push along. James Scott tried to help him, but
he couldn't suppress the grin. The weight of the heavy rifle slung on
Renner's back was some comfort when they went past a bloody patch of
snow strewn with bones. Big bones, larger than a cow's. Or a man's.

     Renner thought enviously of Ajax Boynton back in the tent with tea
and brandy. Boynton hadn't believed there were any ghosts in this area.

     They reached the edge of the woods and Scott gestured Renner off to
his left, briskly.

     They'd been making good time. That was his problem: James and
Darwin weren't holding back anymore. Maybe his impression had been
wrong. Maybe they'd simply decided to indulge the greenhorn. Maybe they
weren't hiding anything at all.

     They moved farther into the woods. It was a strange place, dotted
with bare-limbed maples from Earth, and bumbershoots, and a tall whippy
thing with fuzzy bark that grew twenty meters above the snow, then
drooped again, some drooping so far that their tops were beneath the
snow. As they moved farther in, the trees were spaced closer, some only
three meters apart. Whatever underbrush there might be was buried under
snow.

     His snowshoes kept trying to plunge through. It would be easy to
break a leg.

     Darwin Scott stopped at intervals to thrust a long pole into the
snow. The top of the pole had meters and a jack for earphones. Darwin
listened, then waved them onward.

     Snow mounded on underbrush could be snow mounded on a ghost, Renner
thought. He'd seen a holoflick of a ghost in action; he knew its shape.
But he kept seeing shapes that might be ghosts . . . and he'd point, and
James would shake his head and grin.

     Four two-chamber hearts the beast had. The explosive bullets were
pointed, to do less damage to the fur. A bullet in the torso might kill.
One in the head would kill, but would damage the trophy, and the head
was harder to hit.

     James stopped. Pointed. Darwin nodded vigorously.

     The mound was quite shallow. Kevin Renner stared (his gun not
raised, not yet), but the shape wouldn't .. . yeah, you could find
symmetry there, and if the ground dipped beneath the beast and its legs
were folded along the torso . . . then . . . James and Darwin were both
aiming at the mound, but they waited. Which end was which? Kevin swung
his rifle forward and fired twice into the center of the mound.

     The head came up, three feet off the ground on a thick neck. It
wobbled, turned to look at him. Kevin's peripheral vision caught both
Scott brothers running full out, while Kevin backed away, ready for the
charge. Darwin shouted, Run!"

     The beast reared to its feet. Lumbered toward him. Faster than it
looked, and Renner turned to run, but the beast's foreleg collapsed and
it skidded through the snow. It tried to rise again, and Renner had a
clear shot past its shoulder into the torso. He fired again.

     The snow ghost stayed down. Its head was up, weaving. Trying to
focus its eyes. Then the head dropped into the snow.

 

     They built a frame to hang the beast. James and Darwin skinned it,
carefully, while Renner followed his footprints back to the snowmobile.
He got back dead tired. The brothers had the beast open and were
cleaning out the abdominal cavity. He'd have been interested in the
makeup of the alien beast, but the brothers' knives had chewed its
innards into unrecognizability.

     He rested while the Scotts relayed back for the other vehicles.

     It was the last rest he got that day. He helped roll up the fur,
bloody side out, and roll plastic around it. They cleaned the carcass
and dressed the meat and packed it into two snowmobiles. The roll of fur
rode prominently on top of Renner's buggy.

     Darwin clapped Renner on the back. "Now we can go back. Good shot,
man. Looks like you blew one of the hearts and the hydraulic shock took
out the rest."

     "I want a long rest in a spa." Renner felt wiped out.

     Darwin looked concerned. "Can you drive? We can leave one buggy and
come back for it."

     "No, I'm all right." There wasn't enough room left in either snow
buggy for two people and the remains of the bear. Renner felt pride
washing back his fatigue. They hadn't planned on this big a kill!

     "You'll get your spa in Zion," Darwin said. "Tomorrow"

     "Hey, why so soon? We could take another ghost tomorrow. And I'm
still wondering where the opal meerschaum-"

     "Mr. Renner, that rug should be treated before it starts to rot.
The meat should be sold before it rots. You don't hang snow ghost meat,
or any other red meat animal native to the Purchase. Has to be eaten fresh."

     "Oh."

     They covered five or six miles before the snowmobile came back for
them. Renner wondered why they hadn't simply camped and didn't ask.
Walking was something he did to let his mind get organized; and he'd had
a number of interesting thoughts.

 

     Boynton swore at the size of the carcass, "I still don't believe

it. This place was hunted five years ago. How would it have time to grow
so big?"

     The brothers had only grinned and kept working. There was certainly
work enough for four. They'd laid a fire; they'd cut wood and built a
platform to hang half the carcass over it. The sunset afterlight was
dwindling and the cooking meat smelled wonderful, and Renner was going
to hurt tomorrow.

     It was a matter of pride. You ate the meat when you killed a ghost,
they'd told him. You opened cans when you'd failed.

     "It feels like I've been diddled, and I don't know how or why,"
Renner told his pocket computer. No way of knowing if it was getting
through. "There should be more to it. But we're going back to Zion
tomorrow unless I see some way around it."

 

     He closed the computer. He was ravenous. The meat would take
another hour to cook through. Would it taste as good as dinner at the
palace?

     Less well seasoned, maybe, less well cooked, but fresher. And there
was the "sauce": exhaustion and hunger. Four men would be hard put to
make a dent in that much meat.

     That much meat. He flipped the computer open. The ship would be
halfway to the horizon, dammit. "The ghost was well fed. Why didn't it
attack like the one we watched at the palace? I didn't blow a heart
open. It lived too long. It acted . . drugged. The Scott brothers didn't
seem weary enough, either. If I'm not seeing mirages . . . there'd have
to be a lot of men involved. This is big."

 

     They collapsed the tent and loaded it with the fur and the snow
buggies into the cargo compartment of the plane. The snow ghost meat was
lashed to the struts holding the landing skids. Boynton climbed in and
sat in the pilot's seat.

     "Hey," Darwin Scott said.

     Oh, Hell, I'll fly," Boynton said. "I didn't do anything else to
earn my keep. Son of a bitch, I'd never have believed that big a ghost
would be in here. Farther south, yeah, but not just here."

     "Why didn't we land farther south?" Renner asked.

     "Lakes are too big," Boynton said. "Lots of warm streams from the
volcanoes. Most lakes don't even freeze, and they're all deep. You want
to go down there, you land here and take a long trip on a snow buggy."
He spat through the window. "Which I had intended to do. Son of a bitch."

     James laughed. 'Renner? I wanted to see how you moved before we got
into real danger. I didn't expect any snow ghost, not there."

     The Scott brothers climbed in. James took the right-hand seat next
to Boynton.

     "I'm a pilot," Renner said.

     "Next time," James Scott said. "This is tricky, with the plane
loaded down . .

     "He's right," Boynton agreed. "You ever fly one of these things?
Didn't think so. I'll check you out in Zion. Right now we ought to get
that fur somewhere it'll be properly treated. That's a good fur."

     Renner strapped in behind James Scott and waited until Boynton had
the plane airborne. "Hey, Ajax, take us over the woods where I shot the
ghost,"

     Boynton grinned. "Right. Want to have a look myself."

     "We really ought to be getting in," Darwin Scott said. "Hell, the
man wants to see the place," James said. "Would myself. Good shooting,
Mr. Renner."

     'We'll just circle and go on," Darwin Scott said. "That's a good fur."

     It is that," Boynton agreed.

     There had been light snow that night, but Renner could still make
out their snow buggy tracks in places. The area where they had stopped
was clearly marked, and so were some of their snowshoe tracks.

     "Must have been a lot of wind through here," Boynton muttered.

     Renner frowned. Boynton was right. There was very little snow
caught in the trees here. In the woods near the lake where they'd
landed, there had been a lot more. Here there was less in the trees,
more on the ground. Mmm?

     "Right down there," James Scott said. "Here, I'll take it a
moment." The plane banked and turned in a tight spiral so that Renner
could see down to the scene of his triumph.

     Boynton was on the high side of the plane. He craned up and looked
off to the left. "What the hell . . . ?" "What?" Renner demanded. He
craned past Boynton. "Tracks?"

     South of the forest the snow looked chewed. Snowmobile tires, men's
footprints, the blurred circle where a helicopter must have come down
and taken off. A hell of a lot of activity. Renner said, "Okay, take us-"

     Darwin Scott drove his elbow into Renner's stomach. Renner gasped,
and a sickly sweet smell filled his lungs. He sat back with a sappy grin
on his face. "Peace . . . Sam," he said.

     "What the hell?" Boynton demanded.

     "Gentile friend, you have seen nothing," Darwin Scott said.

     Gentile. Church business?"

     "He is not a gentile," James Scott said. "Lapsed, but he was born
to the Church."

     "I must think on this," Darwin said.

     A part of Renner's mind told him that Boynton was acting strangely,
and so were the Scotts, but he didn't really care. When the plane banked
slightly so that his head rolled, he saw that Darwin was holding a
pistol. Renner giggled.

     "Use the spray," James Scott said. "I have the controls."

     "Hey, I don't want to be no giggling idiot," Boynton said. "Look,
if this is Church business-hell, give me the skin and my share of the
gear, and it's quits for me. I'll say we got a ghost, and the dude
wanted to hunt some more, so we split up. You took the dude off to a
place you didn't want me to know about. After that it's up to you."

     "It would even be true," Darwin Scott said. "We must think on this."

     "While you're thinking, where the hell are we going?" Boynton demanded.

     "Outside Zion there is a small lake," Darwin Scott said. "Land on
that."

 

 

5 The True Church

 

 

Come, come, ye Saints, no toil or labor fear; but with joy wend your way;

     Though hard to you this journey may appear, Grace shall be as your day.

     'Tis far better for us to strive, Our useless cares from us to drive;

     Do this, and joy your hearts will swell-All is well, all is well!

 

     -Hymns of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter Day Saints

 

 

A tiny red light danced in Ruth Cohen's eyes, then the massive door
opened before she could touch the bell. The butler was dressed in a
traditional manner. Ruth hadn't seen anyone in that costume except in
Government House and tri-vee shows. "Welcome, Commander. His Excellency
has been expecting you."

     Ruth glanced down at her best civilian dress and grinned wryly.

     The butler took her overcoat and handed it to another servant. "His
Excellency is in the library," he said, and ushered her down the hall.

     Bury was in his travel chair, not at the desk but at an elaborately
inlaid game table. "You will forgive me if I do not stand? Thank you.
Would you care for a drink? We have an excellent Madeira. Not from
Earth, I fear, but from Santiago, which many say is not greatly inferior,"

     "I would really prefer coffee."

     Bury smiled. "Turkish or filtre?  Filtre. Cynthia, the Kona, I
believe. And my usual. Thank you." Bury indicated a chair.

     'Please be seated, Commander. Thank you."

     Ruth smiled. "Your hospitality is a bit overwhelming."

     Bury's expression didn't change. "Thank you, but I am certain that
a vice admiral's daughter has seen better. Now, what can I do for you?"

     Ruth looked pointedly around the paneled room.

     Bury grinned mirthlessly. "If anyone can listen to me without my
knowledge and consent, some very expensive experts will regret it."

     "I suppose. Your Excellency, Kevin-Sir Kevin invited me to dinner.
Now I'm probably not the first girl he ever stood up, but there's a
matter of his reports as well. And when I called here, no one seemed to
know where he was." She shrugged. "So I came looking."

     Bury's lips twitched. "And I presume you have left messages with
the Imperial Marines in case you also vanish?"

     Ruth blushed slightly.

     Bury laughed. "Renner said you were clever. The truth is,
Commander, I was about to call you. I don't know where he is either.''

"Oh."

     "You put a very great deal of expression into that syllable. You
are fond of my-impetuous-pilot?"

     "I don't have to say."

"Indeed."

     "And he was supposed to make reports-"

     "I have them. Recorded," Bury said. "Renner concocted a scheme for
exploring the outback with three snow ghost hunters. He was suspicious
of two. They left three days ago. I have received no coherent message
since."

     "You have a ship in orbit."

     "Indeed, and Renner's pocket computer was programmed to remind him
of the times when Sinbad would be above the area in which they would be
hunting. At least once we received garbled signals that we assume were
from Renner."

     "You didn't go look for him?"

     Bury indicated his travel chair. "That is hardly my way. What I did
was invite Captain Fox to dinner."

     "Have you learned anything else about our .. . problem?"

     "A great deal, but nothing about Renner," Bury said.

 

     Renner was glad of the blindfold. A blindfold could mean they
didn't intend to kill him. On the other hand, it might mean that they
wanted him to think that.

     On the gripping hand: the snow ghost. They'd made massive efforts
to keep him alive up to now.

     His mind was clearing; the drug had worn off to that extent. But he
couldn't walk.

     He was strapped to a gurney and carried from the lake where they
landed to a closed vehicle. The only time anyone spoke to him was when
he tried to ask where he was. Then a voice he hadn't heard before said,
"We understand that two doses of Peaceable Sam within a few hours
produces a terrible hangover. You'd best be quiet." He decided that was
good advice and concentrated on remembering everything he could.

     The snow tractor drove for about ten minutes, then he was outside
briefly. They went in, and down in an elevator, and presently he felt
smooth acceleration.

     Subway train? They're really organized. He had about decided he was
wrong when he felt deceleration and heard the sounds of electrically
operated doors. Someone started to speak and was shushed.

     They carried him to another elevator, which went down a long way,
then he was rolled down a long corridor with only gentle turns, then to
another elevator, and after that he was maneuvered around often enough
that he lost all sense of direction.

     "So," a new voice said. "Let us see what you have brought us.
Remove the blindfold and straps."

     Renner blinked. The room was large, and completely enclosed, doors
but no windows. He was at one end of a long conference table. They
indicated a chair and helped him sit in it. His legs still didn't want
to do what he told them to.

     Four men sat at the other end of the table. Bright light glared
past them into Renner's face so that he could see them only in outline.

     The Scott brothers stood next to him. One held a spray can. The
other had a pistol.

     They'd dressed him in someone else's clothes and removed everything
he'd been carrying. Renner felt for the alarm tooth and bit it.

     There was a chuckle from the end of the table. "If you have a
transmitter that can send a message from here, I will buy it from you no
matter what it costs."

     "One hundred thousand crowns," Renner said.

     "I appreciate humor, but perhaps we are short of time. Have you
anything serious to say before we fill you with Serconal?"

     "You've been busting your asses to keep me alive. You had to find a
decent snow ghost, herd him north into the forest, wait till he killed
something, drug him, hover over the trees on a helicopter to shake the
snow down to cover him up . . . Twenty or thirty men, a dozen snow
buggies, and a helicopter. Indeed, I'm honored."

     "What do you think you've found, Mr. Renner?"

     "Better you should ask, 'What does Horace Bury think we've found?'
Me, I thought it was more piracy. Then again, you go to too much
trouble; it can't be cost-effective. Religious motives. I'm feeling a
little light-headed."

     "I expect you are. Mister Scott..."

     Darwin Scott took a bottle of scotch from Renner's pack and set it
on the table with a glass. "They tell me this stuff helps."

     Renner poured a hefty shot and drank half of it. "Thanks. Coffee
does it even better. What do I call you?"

     "Ah-Mister Elder will do."

     Renner tried to grin. "Like I said, religious motives. You
understand I thought this out last night after I realized the ghost was
drugged. I still don't understand all that. You'd have done better just
to leave things alone. Bury never cared about your opal meerschaum, and
nobody's actually robbing anyone."

     Mister Elder's shadow shifted restlessly. "It's a problem. Some of
my people do not feel they earn credit in Heaven by doing nothing. You
still have not said what you suspect."

     "I think you've got a periodic Jump point to New Utah."

     The men looked at each other.

     "There's an old description of New Utah system. A good yellow star,
and a neutron star companion in an eccentric orbit. New Utah must have
had billions of years to build up an oxygen atmosphere after the
supernova. The neutron star hasn't been a pulsar for at least that long.

     Renner's head felt clearer. Coffee would have been better, but the
drink had helped . .. and he'd had time to think last night. He said,
"For most of a twenty-one-year cycle, the neutron star is way out beyond
the comets. Quiet. Dark. When it dips close to the major sun, solar wind
and meteors rain down through that godawful gravity field. It flares.
The Jump points depend on electromagnetic output. You get a Jump point
link that lasts maybe two years. That's when you import opal meerschaum,
among other-"

     'Enough. It bothers me to be so transparent, Renner, but this is a
very old secret. The soil isn't right on New Utah. The True Church would
die without periodic fertilizer shipments."

     Renner nodded. "But the gripping hand is Bury. He thinks you're
dealing with Moties. If he goes on thinking that . . . Bury's crazy.
He'll drop an asteroid on you and explain to the Navy later."

     "An asteroid!"

     "Yeah, he thinks that way. Maybe he'll decide that takes too long
and just use a fusion bomb. Whatever he does, it'll be drastic. Then he
could clean up New Utah without interference, without the Navy ever
knowing."

     "He has abducted Captain Fox," Elder said.

     "If Fox knows where I am, Bury will know."

     "He does not. But-"

     "But he does know where your Jump ships hang out," Renner said.
"You've got a problem. Maybe I can help."

     "How?"

Renner looked pointedly around the room. As you said, it's an old
secret. I'm surprised you kept it this long."

"There have been few with Horace Bury's resources seeking it."

     'Resources, brains, and paranoia," Renner said. "I guarantee you he
won't believe anything you can tell him about what happened to me.
Doesn't matter who tells him, either. If I don't get back, he'll think
Moties were involved, and he'll know just where to look. I take it I'm
under the Hand Glacier? You've got a spaceport around here. A secret
one. Bury'll find it."

"Is there anything you do not know?"

     "Come on, it all fits once you get the key part about New Utah."
Renner hesitated. "Then again, I don't truly know that you aren't
dealing with Moties. If you're doing that, you've betrayed the human
race, and you should be nuked."

     Slowly Mister Elder said, "How can we persuade you?"

     "Easy. We'll clear that up in a couple of hours. I'll tell you then.

Meanwhile, let's think about talking Bury out of whatever mischief he's
planning. I'd better do that pretty quick."

     "And after that?"

     "Then we talk to the Governor. Look, right now you haven't done
anything to get you in that much trouble."

     "Only enough to be hanged for high treason."

     "Technically," Renner agreed. "But if they hanged everyone who
trades with relatives on Outie worlds, they'd run out of rope. The only
people killed so far were yours."

     "This is madness." A voice with a whine in it. "Elders, brothers,
this man knows everything. We can't just let him go."

     "Better what I know than what Bury suspects," Renner said.
"Understand something. His Excellency will make sure, I mean really
sure, that there aren't any Moties involved. Once he's done that, he'll
be so relieved, it won't be hard to get him to talk to the Governor.

     "What's the Governor got against you? A little trading with Outies.
Nothing serious. Jackson will be glad of a chance to convince the Church
that the Empire's no real threat. He's been looking for someone to
negotiate with. And look, if New Utah is dying for lack of fertilizer,
they should be in the Empire. We'll make them another offer while the
Jump point's still open."

     The leading Elder stood. "This must be discussed. Is there anything
else you need?"

     'Yeah. There's some coffee in my backpack." Renner got to his feet.
He tried rotating his hips, a standard back exercise. He didn't fall
down. "I seem to be recovered. Now, you've been wary of launching your
ship while Bury's on the Purchase. Correct?"

"Yes."

     "Take me to it. Show me that ship, no arguments, no phone calls,
take me there now. All of you."

 

     "I didn't give them time to fool with the ship. They couldn't have
done much anyway. They led me right to it. I saw everything, outside and
in. There's nothing of Watchmaker manufacture. Horace, I know the Motie
touch! There's no mistaking their hand. They make one widget do two or
three jobs at once, they don't know from right angles, you remember."

     Bury was silent, head bowed, eyes hooded in shadow.

     "I found two variants on the Motie coffeepot. One takes the
caffeine out of tea. The other must have been added in the last month,
the joins are still new. It filters the hydrogen fuel. There's a layer
of Motie superconductor under the reentry shield. All three carried the
Imperial Autonetics logo."

     Ruth Cohen was perched at the edge of her chair. "They took you
there right away?"

     "I damn well made them. Three different elevators, but I took the
whole entourage with me. They cooperated. I'm as sure as can be that
they didn't phone ahead. Mister Elder had to threaten the guards with
damnation when we got there, and then they made calls while I inspected
the outside, but I was inside within five minutes. Bury?"

     Bury's head came up. 'Yes?"

     "Do I have your attention? I wasn't sure. Look, if you had access
to Watchmakers and Engineers, and you-"

     "I'd kill them. You know that." There was no force behind his
words. He looked old, old.

     "Assume, just assume that they're allies. Pretend you trust them.
Wouldn't you set them loose on a ground-to-orbit ship? A little
improvement in a space shuttle can double the cargo capacity! For a
smuggler, that's golden! But it was an old ship, refurbished, and the
engineering was entirely human and not very good at that.

     "These people are not in contact with Moties, Mr. Bury."

     Bury didn't move.

     Ruth Cohen used the stylus to make notes on the face of her pocket
computer. "Kevin, I believe you, but we still have to be sure."

     "You'll take care of that," Renner said. "They've got a ship on
station at that wavering Jump point. Send a small ship with a couple of
Navy people to inspect that ship. Go yourself. When they signal that
it's clean, we talk to the Governor."

     "It will work," Ruth said. "Governor Jackson would look very good
if he could persuade New Utah to come into the Empire without a fight,
and this might just do it. Fertilizer! Well, they're not the first world
to have a soil problem.

     "All right. Between the regulations about Moties and your
reputation, we won't have any trouble getting Captain Torgeson to send a
scout ship out to the Jump point. One of the local Church people ought
to go, so there won't be a fight."

     "Ohran," Renner said. "The one who called himself Mr. Elder is a
high-ranking bishop named Ohran. Send him." Renner poured himself a
brandy. "And that takes care of that. Mr. Bury-damn it, Horace!"

     Only Horace Bury's sunken dark eyes moved. They burned. "They're
not here now. They're still corked up behind the blockade for now. For a
quarter of a century I have left it to the Navy to keep them that way.
Kevin, I've remembered too much. I've always known how dangerous they
are. I manage not to think about it unless I'm asleep. Kevin, we must
visit the blockade fleet."

     "What? At Murcheson's Eye?"

     "Yes. I need to know that the Navy is on duty, Else I will go mad."

     Ruth Cohen spoke. "Your Excellency, your dossier indicates that
your . . . that the Secret Service may take exception to your plans."

     Bury grinned. "Let them hang me, then. No, I don't mean that, and
of course you're right. I'll have to be persuasive in a number   of
places. We'll have to go to Sparta."

     "Sparta." Ruth Cohen sighed. "I'd like to see Sparta someday."

     "Come with us," Renner said.

     "What? Kevin, I'm assigned here."

     "We can get those orders changed. I can requisition people at need."

     "What need?" she asked suspiciously.

     "Well..."

     "I thought so."

     "Actually there is a very good reason," Bury said. "Kevin, you
propose to convince the Governor to condone high treason. I do not doubt
your ability to justify that on Sparta, but it will do no harm to have
another Navy officer confirm our story." Bury drained his coffee, "So.
Commander, if you will see to the investigation of the ship at the Jump
point, Nabil will make Sinbad ready for the voyage."

     "That'll give me some time," Renner said. "I'm going back to the
spill."

 "Surely we have better wines and whiskeys here." Bury glanced
significantly at Ruth Cohen. "And better companionship as well."

"Oh, easily. But that miserable wimp Boynton still has my snow ghost
fur. I'm going down to the Maguey Worm and take it back."

 

 

PART 2

 

SPARTA

 

 

Treason doth never prosper: what's the reason?

For if it prosper, none dare call it treason.

 

-Sir John Harington

 

1 Capital

 

For forms of government let fools contest:

Whate're is best administered is best.

City

 

-Alexander Pope, 'Epistle III, Of the Nature and

State of Man with Respect to Society"

 

 

AD. 3046

Imperial University

     The Imperial University was founded in CoDominium times as the
University of Sparta and enjoyed close ties to several Earth
institutions including the University of Chicago, Stanford University,
Columbia, Westinghouse Institute, and the University of Cambridge. In
exchange for the privilege of appointing a majority of the regents, the
first kings of Sparta endowed the University of Sparta with extensive
lands in the hill regions south and east of the capital. Much of that
land was subsequently leased to commercial institutions, so that the
University enjoys a large income not under political control. The name
was changed to Imperial University during the early years of the First
Empire,

     The capital has also expanded to engulf lands previously granted to
the aristocracy, some of whom retain estates now surrounded by city
buildings.

 

 

The study at Blaine Manor looked like what the designer had imagined
were the rooms of an Oxford don in the nineteenth century. The furniture
was leather and dark wood. Holograms of books lined the seven-meter
walls, and a rolling ladder stood in one corner. Roderick, Lord Blaine,
Earl of Acrux, DSC, GCMG, Captain ISN (Ret.), frowned at it as he went
past. Nobody ever used it except to maintain the hologram generators.
He'd sworn a dozen times to have the place redecorated to something more
functional, but so far nothing that appealed to him was satisfactory to
Sally, and it did show images of real books in his library. As usual he
looked over some of the titles. Macaulay's History of England stood next
to Gibbon Crofton's Guide to the CoDominium. Savage's classic Lysunder
the Great. Ought to read that one again...

     Blainpe crossed the study and went into the small office off to one
side. "I thought I heard a door slam."

     Sally Blaine looked up from the computer. "Glenda Ruth."

     Another fight?"

     Let's just say our daughter is not entirely happy with the rules at
Blaine Manor."

     Independent sort. Reminds me of someone I used to know."

     Used to know? Thank you."

     Rod grinned and put a hand on her shoulder. "Still do. You know
what I mean."

     "I suppose-you didn't come in here to talk about Glenda Ruth."

"No, but maybe I ought to have a word with her." "I wish you would, butt
you never do. What's up?" "Got a message. Guess who's coming to visit'?"

     Sally Blaine looked back at the computer screen and scowled. "Thank
you very much. I've just managed to straighten out our social schedule.
Who?"

     "His Excellency Horace Hussein al-Shamlan Bury, Magnate. And Kevin
Renner."

     Sally thought. "It'd be nice to see Mr. Renner again. And, Bury
comes with him, I seem to remember. Watchdog. I suppose-"

     "I won't have Bury in our home. He was one of the instigators of
the New Chicago revolt." Lady Blaine froze.

     He squeezed her shoulder. "Sorry."

     "I'm all right.'' She patted his hand, then ran fingertips up into
the loose sleeve of his dressing gown. Smooth, ridged, hairless. Your
scars are real."

     "You spent weeks in a prison camp, and you lost your friend."

     It was a long time ago, Rod. I can't even remember Dorothy's face.
Rod, I'm glad you didn't tell me then. Nine months on MacArthur with
Horace Bury. I'd have spit in his face."

     "No, you wouldn't. You won't now. I know you. I suppose we'll have
to see him, but we'll keep it to a minimum. I gather Bury's done some
good work for the Secret Service."

     "Let me think about it. At the worst we can take them to dinner.
Someplace neutral. I do want to see . . . Sir Kevin?"

     "Right again, I'd forgotten. I want to see him, too." Blaine
smiled. "For that matter, so will Bruno Cziller. I better tell him his
crazy navigator is in town. Tell you what, love. Since the news came
through the Institute, I'll invite them to the Institute. They may
regret that. Everyone and his dog will want to interview them."

     When Sally turned around, she was smiling broadly. Yes, the
Institute. We have a surprise for His Excellency, don't we?"

     "What-hey! He'll think he's back in MacArthur. We'll test out his
bioheart!"

 

 

 

***WARNING***

 

     You have entered the controlled zone of the Imperial capital.

 

     It is strictly forbidden to remain in this star system without
permission. Notify the Navy ships on patrol at the Alderson entry points
and follow instructions. The Navy is authorized to use deadly force
against uncooperative intruders.

Transmit your identification codes immediately

 

     **YOU WILL RECEIVE NO FURTHER WARNING MESSAGES**

 

 

     Cruising through Sparta system could make a man nervous.

     The sky was no different, except in that all skies are different.
Stars formed new patterns. The little KO star Agamemnon was a bright
white flare growing to become a sun. The companion star Menalaus was a
fat red spark. Asteroids sparkled well below Sinbad's path, and then
tiny crescents that showed as ringed and banded gas giants in the screens.

     That was how star travel was. Cruise outward, find the Jump point,
Jump across interstellar distance in a wink. Blast across space to the
next Jump point. Then cruise inward through the new system, new planets,
toward a new world with different climate, customs, attitudes

     But Sparta was the capital of the Empire of Man.

     The black sky was as peaceful as it would have been anywhere; but
there were voices. Alter course. Increase deceleration. Watch your
exhaust vector, Sinbad! Warning. Identify. Those gas giants, so
peculiarly and conveniently close to Sparta's orbit with their massive
atmospheres of spacecraft fuel and industrial chemicals, were surrounded
by great naval installations massively guarded. Ships guarded the score
of Jump points that led everywhere in the Empire. Eyes watched Sinbad as
Renner brought the yacht inward.

     Renner maintained his cool as best he could. His image was at stake
. . . and Ruth was having a wonderful time, but Bury needed calming.
Horace Bury didn't like being watched, particularly by weapons that
could tear the skin off a continent.

     Sparta was white on blue, the colors of a nearly typical water
world. Renner glimpsed the curled shape of Serpens, the mainland; the
rest was one tremendous ocean with a few dots of island. The planet's
near vicinity swarmed with ships and orbital junk, growing thicker in
geosynchronous orbit.

     Customs kept changing Renner's path to avoid collisions as he moved
inward. He didn't see much of what he was avoiding, though he did come
in view of a tremendous wheel-shaped space station. Most of this was
military stuff, he thought. Most incoming ships had to park on the moon;
but Customs knew Horace Bury.

     They knew him well, and not as an agent of the Secret Service. They
were beginning their search of Sinbad as Renner took the shuttle out of
its bay and started his descent.

     It was his first sight of Sparta, and Ruth's, too. They watched
avidly as the world came close.

     Water. Sparta seemed all ocean, what he could see through the
clouds. The shuttle moved into darkness and he saw only a smooth black
curve.

     Then: rough edges on the horizon. Then: lights. Islands, myriads of
them, all tiny, all glowing; and a shape like a coiled snake on fire.
Sparta was tectonically active, but lava had boiled up preferentially on
this limb of the planet. Serpens, the Australia sized mainland, had one
terrific harbor: the land was stretched into a mountainous rugged helix.
Mountain ridges were dark patches in the luminescence. Farmland was
rectangular patterns of tiny lights. There was a lot of it. Cityscape
blazed; there was a lot of city, too. Even the water crawled with tiny
moving lights.

     The capital of an interstellar Empire was bound to be crowded.

     He steered wide of Serpens, circling the coast as he shed speed.
The radio was quacking at him; he tried not to say anything amusing.
He'd never found a Customs officer with a sense of humor, not on any world.

     He was low enough to see phosphorescent wakes behind some of the
hundreds of ships. There were barges floating on the water, houses and
bigger habitats. Population: 500 million, most of it gathered in this
one spot. It struck Renner that if he flew a sonic boom straight across
the mainland, Bury would be wiped out by the fines.

     "Horace? How are you doing?"

     "Fine, Kevin, fine. You're a good pilot."

     Bury had been affable with Customs, but when they hung up, Renner
had heard esoteric cursing. Now he asked, "What did Customs do to get
you so upset?"

     "Nothing. You know where to land?"

     "They're telling me yet again. Black water, just ahead of us. We'll
come down outside the harbor and spiral in like a big boat. I wonder
where they'd put me down on a rough day"

     Bury said nothing for a bit. Then, "On Sparta I am a second class
citizen. Only here, but forever. Department-store clerks will serve me,
and I can bribe a headwaiter and hire my own car. But there are parts of
Sparta I may never see, and on the slidewalks..

     "You're getting mad before anyone's insulted you. Oh, well, why
wait till the last minute?"

     "I've been to Sparta before. Why in Allah's Merciful Name couldn't
Cunningham see me today?"

     "Maybe he thinks he's giving you a day's rest.

     "He's making me wait. Damn him. My superior. Bless you for not
using that word, Ruth, but I knew what you were thinking."

     Ruth said, "It's a technical term.'

     "Of course."

     On Serpens the flat land had been occupied long ago, as farmland or
baronial estates. New buildings such as the Imperial Plaza Hotel tended
to cling to the sides of cliffs. The Plaza stood eighty stories tall on
the low side, sixty-six on the high.

     Bury's agent had rented the lowest of the suites, the seventy-first
floor. It had been fully furnished, and servants were in residence; but
only two were awake when they arrived.

     Through the picture wall they could see a vastness of sea and
islands and a hundred shapes of boats and ships, and Sparta's gross red
sun easing clear of the water. It was five in the morning of a
twenty-hour day. By ship's time it was close to noon. "I feel like a
serious breakfast," Renner said. "Coffee. Real cream, not protocarb
milk. Restaurant probably isn't open, though."

     Bury smiled. "Nabil-"

     The kitchen staff had to be awakened. Breakfast took over an hour
to appear, while they emptied their suitcases and settled in. Lots of
luggage. No telling how long they would be on Sparta. How persuasive
would Bury need to be?

     Maniac. But was he wrong? It might be vital that a Master Trader
send himself to inspect the Crazy Eddie Fleet on patrol at Murcheson's
Eye. But if the Secret Service wanted something else from him . . .
well, they had something on Bury. Probably something political.

     They'd all learn tomorrow.

     "Every little boy and girl wants to see Sparta," Renner told Ruth.

"What do we want to see first?"

     Bury said, The Institute doesn't open until noon. We'll have four
hours to play in, I think. I expect I'll drop in at the Traders Guild
and make some waves. Ah, here's Nabil."

     Breakfast featured two species of eggs and four varieties of
sausage and two liters of milk. The fruits all looked familiar. So did
the eggs: chicken and quail. Life on Sparta (Renner now remembered
reading) had never really conquered the land. There wasn't enough land
to make it cost-effective. The planet had been seeded with a variety of
Terran wildlife, and an ecology established itself with little native
competition.

     "They eat two meals on Sparta, breakfast and dinner. We should eat
our fill," Bury told them.

     "The milk's a little odd," Ruth said.

     "Different cows eating different grass. Mark of authenticity, Ruth.
Protocarb milk always tastes the same, every ship in the universe."

     "Honestly, Kevin, I like protocarb milk."

     The coffeepot was tall and bulbous. Bury looked underneath it.
"Wideawake Enterprise," he said.

     "You don't sound happy about it," Ruth Cohen said.

     "Motie technology," Renner said. "Probably common here."

     "Very common here," Bury said. "Nabil, do we have a computer?"

     'Yes, Excellency. The call name is Horvendile."

     "Horvendile, this is Bury."

     "Confirm," a contralto voice said from the ceiling. "Horvendile,
this is His Excellency Bury," Nabil said. "Accepted. Welcome to the
Imperial Plaza, Your Excellency." "Horvendile, phone Jacob Buckman,
astronomer, associated with the University."

     A moment passed. Then a somewhat waspish voice said, "This is Jacob
Buckman's auxiliary brain. Dr. Buckman is asleep. Your Excellency, he
thanks you for the gifts. Is there sufficient urgency to wake him?"

     "No. I am at the Imperial Plaza and will be on Sparta for a week. I
would like an appointment when convenient. Social hours."

     "Dr. Buckman has meetings Wednesday afternoon and evening, and
nothing else."

     "I suggest Thursday afternoon and dinner Thursday night."

     "I will tell him. Do you wish to record a message?"

     "Yes. Jacob, I'd like to see you before one of us dies of old age
and sloppy medical techniques. I told your machine Thursday, but any
time will do. Message ends."

     "Is there anything else?" Buckman's voice asked.

     "Thank you, no."

     "I will inform Horvendile when the appointment is confirmed. Good day."

     "Horvendile."

     "Your Excellency."

     "Appointment with Dr. Jacob Buckman at his convenience, highest
social priority."

     "Acknowledged."

     "Thank you, Horvendile. Now get me an appointment with the
president of the Traders Guild."

     The contralto voice said, "That is His Excellency Benjamin Sergei
Sachs, chairman of Union Express. When did you wish to see him?"

     "As soon as possible."

     There was a pause. His computer reports this morning is free. Shall
I ask for an immediate appointment?"

     "Yes, Horvendile." Bury sipped coffee. "Where will you go?"

     Renner shrugged. "Doubtless we'll think of something. Are you sure
you'll be able to see the president of the ITA on such short   notice?"

     Bury's smile was thin. "Kevin, I control seven seats on theboard.
Not a majority, but more than enough to veto a candidate for president.
Yes, I think Ben Sachs will see me."

     His Excellency will be delighted to see you at any time, Your
Excellency," the ceiling said. "If you wish, he will send a limousine."

     "Please ask him to do so. Thank you, Horvendile."

 

 

     The exterior facade of the clubrooms of the Imperial Traders
Association alternated phases of opulent ostentation and quiet elegance,
It had recently been redecorated in plain white marble. The severe lines
extended into the lobby, but beyond the Members' door were the familiar
walnut-paneled walls and original oil paintings Bury remembered from the
last time he was there.

     The President was waiting for him in a private conference room and
stood when Bury drove his travel chair into the room. He was a large
man, impeccably dressed in a dark tunic and matching trousers. A yellow
sash broke the monotony of colors. Excellency. Good to see you. All
well, I take it?" -

     "Yes, thank you, Your Excellency. And yourself?  Splendid."

     Bury indicated his travel chair. "Sparta gravity."

     "Of course. Some days I wouldn't mind getting around in a travel
chair myself. What can I do for you, Excellency?"

     "Thank you, nothing. I have only come to see my colleagues and
enjoy my club."

     "I'm glad you can find the time. But if there is anything at all we
can do . .

     "Well, perhaps there is a small favor you could do for me."

     Your Excellency has only to name it."

 "How well do we get along with the government this year?"

     Sachs shrugged. "Probably as well as we ever do. Of course they
will never love us."

     "It may be that you could help me. I wish to visit the blockade
fleet off Murcheson's Eye." Sachs's eyes widened. "The Navy has never
been fond of us." Bury snorted. "They hate us."

"Many do."

     "I hope to persuade the Navy," Bury said. What I must be sure of is
expeditious service from the bureaucracy when I need the formal documents."

     Sachs grinned broadly. Clearly he had been expecting a more
difficult task. "Ah. That should be no problem. Your Excellency, I think
you should meet the Honorable George Hoskins, our Vice President for
Public Affairs."

     "George Hoskins. Of Wideawake Enterprises?"

     "Yes, Excellency." Sachs looked thoughtful. "His company does
compete with yours, but then nearly everyone does! Have you met him?"

"I never had the pleasure."

"Then I must introduce you. I will send for him"

     Bury touched the keys of the shorthand ball built into his travel
chair. After a moment a voice spoke quietly in his ear:

     "Wideawake Enterprises. Founded in 3021 by George Hoskins (now the
Honorable George Hoskins, PC), formerly of New Winchester. The company's
first product was a coffee-filtering system based on Motie technology.
Imperial Autonetics asked for an injunction prohibiting sale of the
Wideawake Coffeepot on the grounds that IA had exclusive license to
exploit Motie technology, but this was rejected by the Imperial Court of
Appeals on the grounds that all Motie technology had been obtained by
the Navy, and any unclassified knowledge was therefore public domain.

     "IA investigation revealed that Hoskins had a brother-in-law aboard
INSS Hadley at the time that the ship's coffee-making system
disappeared, and that the redesign which made the coffeepot easier to
reproduce was primarily the work of Harvey Lavrenty, married to
Hoskins's daughter Miriam.

Aggressive marketing combined with a readiness of the civilian economy
to accept the Wideawake Coffee System resulted in unprecedented sales and-

     Bury switched off the voice. He remembered the rest. Two years and
a million crowns to master the secrets of the magic coffeepot. Nearly 50
million to expand and reconvert factories. The Navy had bought
coffeepots as fast as Imperial Autonetics could make them and paid well;
but the real money would have been in selling to civilians. Then Hoskins
and Wideawake burst on the scene.

     Imperial Autonetics had done Hoskins's advertising for him.
Civilians had been hearing about the Navy's magic coffeepots for two
years. IA remained second in sales to this day.

     Bury said, I look forward to meeting the Honorable Mister Hoskins
with great pleasure."

 

     The Honorable George Hoskins was a round, cheerful man, expensively
dressed. He had a wide smile and a handshake of great enthusiasm. After
introductions, Sachs excused himself and left them in the conference room.

     Hoskins bubbled. "You're a legend, you know, throughout the Empire.
Can I get you coffee?" A wide-open face that showed every thought, and
guilt was not there. A man who never remembered a crime. Horace Bury at
least knew when he had something to hide!

     "Thank you. I'll serve myself," Bury said. "Would you care for some
waterwing liqueur? I had a case sent over." Wherever Sinbad set down,
Bury would buy several cases of something distinctive. They made easy gifts.

 

 

There had been a time when Turkish coffee wasn't available at the ITA,
but that was before Bury controlled seven seats on the board. Now there
were three varieties. Bury chose a Mocha     Sumatra mix and sipped
while Sachs perched at the edge of a massage chair

"I'd give half my fortune to visit Mote Prime," he said. "What's really
like?"

     Bury had heard that question too often. "Light gravity. Sunset all
the time, from the red sun in daytime and Murcheson's Eye at night. The
air is slow poison, but masks were all we needed. Architecture straight
out of nightmares, and nightmare shapes moving through it. I was
frightened all the time, and you know, they did murder three midshipmen
who strayed out of open territory through no fault of their own."

     "I know. Still, we should go back. What they could teach us!"

     Hoskins was among the most enthusiastic supporters of that faction,
the Traders who wanted open contact with the Mote. Small wonder.
Still-could he be talked around?

     "You made your fortune in Motie technology, Mister Hoskins. You
counted coup on me, in fact. Has it crossed your mind that someone might
take new Motie technology and do the same to you? Some Motie entrepreneur?"

     Hoskins chuckled. "Oh, Excellency, how would they-Motie entrepreneurs?"

     "You have read of the Motie Mediators? They are assigned to study
important visitors. Study is not strong enough. They learn everything
they can, until they think like the subject of their attentions.

     "One was assigned to me."

     Hoskins had been listening with a puzzled expression. Now it
changed to alarm. "There will be Moties who think the way you do?"

     "It seems likely. Worse, from your view. They will think the way I
did in those times, when I was younger and more aggressive." He did not
add that his Fyunch(click) was certainly dead by now.

     "It's tough enough competing with you," Hoskins said. "A Motie who
thinks like you and has Motie technology would be- formidable."

     Bury smiled in satisfaction. "I hoped you might see it that way.
Now there is another matter. What are the disturbing rumors I hear
concerning the Blockade Fleet's budget?"

     Hoskins shrugged. "Certainly many of the stories we have heard
about waste and inefficiency were not rumors. Have you seen the series
by Alysia Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo in the Capital Update?"

     "Summaries."

     "Ms. Trujillo has found corruption, inefficiency, waste-more than
enough to justify an investigation."

     "You want to cut the Blockade Fleet budget?" Bury asked.

     "Certainly. When did we ever support larger appropriations for the
Navy?"

     "When we run into Outies. When our trade ships are threatened by
pirates."

"I see. This is serious, then."

     "Serious enough that they're sending a new Viceroy to New
Caledonia," Hoskins said. "Baron Sir Andrew Calvin Mercer. Do you know him?"

     "No."

     "Sorry, of course you wouldn't. He spent most of his time in the
Old Earth sector. Would you like to meet him? He's introducing our guest
speaker at the dinner tonight. I can arrange to have you at the head
table if you like."

     Tonight? And the University this afternoon. A busy day, but this
was urgent. "I would be honored," Bury said.

 

     Bury settled into the limousine.

     "Imperial Plaza to collect Sir Kevin Renner," he told the driver.
"Then to the Blaine Institute."

     "Yes, sir."

     The limousine's bar held local liquors, rum, and vodka, and a
Mote-technology thermos of coffee made by Nabil before Bury left, but he
selected a bulb of fruit juices. A bottle of evil-tasting tonic rested
beside the thermos. Bury poured a shot glass full and drank with a
grimace, then killed the taste with fruit juice.

     A small price to pay for a clear head and good memory at my age. He
reached for his shorthand ball and let his fingers play over the keys.
He had mastered the modern practice of conversing with computers, but he
often preferred keyboards. They made the machines seem less human. He
liked that.

     "Sir Andrew Mercer, Baron Calvin," the computer said into his ear.
"Distantly related to the Imperial family on his mother's side. Widower.
Two children. Lieutenant Commander the Honorable Andrew Calvin Mercer,
Jr., serves aboard INSS Terrible. Dr. Jeana Calvin Ramirez is Associate
Professor of History at Undine University on Tanith.

     "Appointed a junior officer in the Department of Commonwealth
Affairs upon graduation from New Harvard University in 3014 and has
remained continuously in the civil service from then to present.
Inducted as a Commander of the Imperial Order, 3028; Knight of St.
Michael and St. George, 3033. Succeeded to status of civil baron on the
death of his father in 3038.

     "Series of staff offices until appointed Lieutenant Governor of
Franklin in 3026. When the Governor was killed in an Outie attack,
Mercer became Acting Governor and was confirmed in post of Governor in
3027. Rapid promotions thereafter. Was Chief of Mission with rank of
Ambassador in the negotiations leading to the reincorporation of New
Washington in 3037. Privy Counselor after 3038. Secretary of State for
Trans-Coal Sack Affairs, 3039 to present. Member of board of directors,
Blaine Institute, 3040 to present.

     "Appointment as Viceroy, Trans-Coal Sack Sector, to take effect

upon his arrival at New Caledonia."

     "More," Bury muttered. "Motivations and ambitions?"

     "Moderate personal wealth. Prefers honors to increase in fortune.
Has written two articles purporting to prove that his family held title
of marquis during the First Empire. He hopes to regain the title."

     "Evidence?"

     "Calvin has become a client of Haladay Genealogical Services, and a
member of the Augustan Society. He has made no secret of his ambition.
Haladay is a subsidiary of Confidential Services, Inc."

     "Enough," Bury said. Moderate personal wealth, and he wouldn't
become Viceroy until he reached New Caledonia. He wouldn't be traveling
in any lavish style. Bury smiled thinly.

 

2 Tourists

 

We have explained in various ways all things to men in this Qur'an;but
of all things man is most contentious.

 

-al-qur'an

 

The bus was supposed to land on the hotel roof at 0830. Kevin and Ruth
got there five minutes early. A dozen others waited for the tour to start.

     The rooftop was still shadowed by the mountains to the east, but
south and west the harbor was in bright sunshine. Even this early the
vast harbor bay was lined with the wakes of both big ships and sailing
craft. A warren of small boats, power and sail, many of them
multihulled, jammed much of the docking area nearest the hotel. Most
appeared to be yachts, but there were also square-hulled junks covered
with laundry and children.

     The tops of the mountains to the east and north were hidden in clouds.

     Renner pointed. Far to the south they could see where the continent
ended in steep mountains. "Blaine Institute is down there. According to
the maps it's over a hundred kilometers to the ocean."

     "One benefit of empire," Ruth said. Renner raised an eyebrow.
"Clear air. Out in the new provinces they're still burning coal."

     "True enough. Bury makes a fortune bringing in fusion plants and
power satellites. It helps if your customers have to buy-"

     "They don't have to buy from Bury. And even if they did, hey, it's
worth it!"

           Renner took a deep breath. "Sure."

     The bus landed on the hotel roof at exactly 0830. When Kevin and
Ruth got on, a small man with a round face and red-veined nose looked at
them quizzically. "Sir Kevin Renner?"

     "That's me."

     "Durk Riley. I'm your guide, sir. And you must be Commander Cohen."

     "Did we order a guide?" Ruth asked.

     "Nabil," Renner said.

     "I've reserved you seats, sir." Riley indicated three places near
the front of the bus. "Always like to have Navy people with me. I put in
nearly forty years. Retired as coxs'n about twenty years ago. I'd have
stayed in, but my wife talked me out of it. Civilian life's no good, you
know. Nothing to do. Nothing important. Well, I don't mean that the way
it sounds." Ruth smiled. "We understand."

     "Thank you, ma'am. I don't usually talk so much about myself. Sure
glad to see Navy people. You Navy, Sir Kevin?"

     "Reserve. Sailing Master. I went inactive about the same time you
retired."

     Kevin and Ruth took their seats and settled back. Riley produced a
hip flask. "Little nip?"

     "Thank you, no," Kevin said.

     "You're thinking it's a bit early. Guess it is, even for Sparta,
but with the short days we tend to do things a little different here."

     "Well, why not?" Kevin reached for the flask. "Good stuff. Irish?"

     "What they call Irish most places. We just call it whiskey. Better
strap in."

     The sky was as crowded as the sea. The bus rose through a swarm of
light planes and heavy cargo craft and other airfoil-contoured buses,
curved wide away from an empty area a minute before some kind of
spacecraft came whistling through it, and went east toward the
mountains. It followed the tiers of houses and estates up into the
clouds. They broke through cloud cover to see that the black
mountaintops went up high above them.

     "That's pretty," Ruth said. "What do you call those mountains?"

     "Drakenbergs," Riley said. "Run down most of the length of the
Serpens. Serpens is the continent."

     "Barren up here," Renner said.

     The Serpens had a sharp-curled spine, black mountain flanks bare of
life. Sparta hadn't developed foliage to handle that soil, and it held
too much heavy metal for most earthly plants. The tour director told
them that and more as they flew along the spine of the continent.

     The bus dropped back below the tablecloth of clouds and followed
the curve of the mountains to where they dipped into the ocean, dropped
to half a kilometer altitude, and headed south across the harbor.

     "That's Old Sparta to the left," Riley said. "Parts date back to

     CoDominium days. See that green patch with tall buildings around

     it? That's the Palace area."

     "Will we go closer?" Ruth asked.

     'Fraid not. There are Palace tours, though."

     Boats of every size moved randomly across the calm water. They
continued south. The calm water of the tremendous harbor changed from
green to blue, sharply. The sea bottom was visible, still shallow; the
boats were fewer, and larger.

     "It doesn't show," Ruth said.

     "Yeah." Renner had guessed what she meant. "They rule a thousand
worlds from here, but . . It's like the zoo on Mote Prime. Sure it's a
different world, sure there's nothing like it anywhere in the universe,
but you get used to that when you travel enough. You expect major
differences. But it's not fair, Ruth. We look for worlds like Earth
because that's where we can live."

     Riley was staring. Other heads had turned from windows. Zoo

     on Mote Prime?

     "Defenses," Ruth said. "There's a difference. Sparta must be the

     most heavily defended world of all."

     "Yeah. And all that means is, there are places the bus won't go.

     And questions Mr. Riley won't answer."

     Riley said, "Well, of course."

     Ruth was smiling. "Don't test that, all right? I know you. We're

on holiday."

     "Okay."

     "I don't know anything about Sparta's defenses anyway," Riley

     said uncomfortably. "Mr. Renner? You were on the Mote expedition?"

     "Yup. Riley, I didn't keep any secrets, and it's all been
declassified. You can get my testimony under What I Did on My Summer
Vacation, by Kevin Renner. Published by Athenaeum in 3021. I get a royalty,"

     There was a storm to the east. The bus flew west and dropped even
lower (the ride became bumpy) to fly above a huge cargo ship. Big
stabilizer fins showed with the roll of the waves, waves the size of
small hills. There were pleasure boats, too, graceful sailing boats that
rolled as they climbed up and down the water mountains; their sails were
constantly shifting along the masts.

     The bus skimmed over a big island patterned in rectangles of
farmland. "That's the Devil Crab," Riley said. "Two sugarcane
plantations and maybe a hundred independents. I'd love to be a farmer.
They don't pay taxes."

     Renner jumped. "Hey?"

     "Population's dense on Sparta. The cost of land on Serpens is . . .
well, I never tried to buy any, but it's way up there. If the farmers
didn't get some kind of break, they'd all sell out to the people who
build hotels. Then all the food would have to be shipped in from far
away, and where would the Emperor get his fresh fruit?"

     "Wow! No taxes. What about these guys below us?"

     "They don't pay either. Transport costs are high, and the produce
isn't as fresh when it gets to Serpens. The Serpens farmers can still
compete. Even so, this is the way I'd go. Lease an island a thousand
klicks from Serpens and raise beef. There's no room to raise red meat on
this part of Serpens."

     They veered away from another rocky island that seemed to be
covered with a patchwork of concrete slabs and domes. "There's some of
the defense stuff," Renner said. "Battle management radars, and I'd bet
there are some pretty hefty lasers in there."

     "It's a good guess, but I wouldn't know," Riley said.

     Presently the bus turned north and east and flew toward the narrow
hooked spit that enclosed the harbor from the west. "That was the prison
colony back in CoDominium days," Riley said. "If you look close, you can
see where the old wall was. Ran right across the peninsula."

     "There? It's mostly parks," Ruth said. "Or-"

     "Rose gardens," Riley said. "When Lysander II tore down old prison
walls, he gave all that area to the public. There's rose festival every
year. Citizen fraternities compete, and it's a deal. We do tours every
other day, if you're interested."

     "Where's Blaine Institute?" Ruth asked.

     "Off east. To the right there. See that mountain covered with
buildings?"

     "Yes-it looks like an old painting I saw once."

     "That's the Blaine Institute?" Renner said. "Captain Blaine's
richer than I suspected. And to think I knew him..."

     "Did you, Sir?" Riley sounded impressed. "But that's the Biology
section of Imperial University. The Institute is the smaller area next
to it." He offered his binoculars. "And Blaine Manor sits on the hill
just east of that. Would you like a tour of the Institute?"

     "Thanks, we'll be there this afternoon," Ruth said.

     The bus crossed the narrow spit and then stayed well out over the
harbor. The sun had burned off most of the cloud cover over the city.
The skyline was a jumble of shapes: in the center and to the south were
massive square skyscrapers, thin towers, tall buildings connected by
bridges a thousand feet above street level. North of that were lower
granite buildings in a classic style. In the center were the green parks
of the Palace district.

     Renner looked thoughtful. "Ruth, think about it. The Emperor is
over there. Just lob a big fusion bomb in the general direction of the
Palace .

     He stopped because everyone on the bus was looking at him.

     "Hey! I'm a Naval Reserve officer!" he said quickly. "I'm trying to
figure out how you keep someone else from doing it. With this many
people on Sparta, and visitors from everywhere, there's bound to be
crazies."

     "We get our share, Sir Kevin." Riley emphasized the title so
everyone would hear it.

     "We do check on people coming to Sparta," Ruth said. Her voice had
dropped. "And it's not all that easy to buy an atom bomb."

     "That might stop amateurs."

     "Oh, all right," Ruth said. "Drop it, huh? It's a depressing thought."

     "It's something we live with," Riley said. "Look, we have ways to
spot the crazies. And generally professionals won't try because it won't
do them any good. Everybody knows the royal family's never all in the
same place. Prince Aeneas doesn't even live on this planet. Blow up
Serpens and you'll get the Fleet mad as hell, but you won't kill the
Empire. One thing we do not do-sir-is tell everybody on a random tour
bus all about the defenses!"

     "And one thing I don't do," Renner answered, and his voice had
dropped low, "is guard my mouth. It would prevent me from learning
things. Even so: sorry."

     Riley grunted. "Yes, sir. Look over there. Those are the fish
farms." He pointed to a series of brightly colored sea patches divided
by low walls. "That's another good racket. Fish from offplanet don't do
well out in Sparta's oceans. You want sea bass or ocean cat, it'll come
from here or someplace like it."

 

     The limousine was waiting at the hotel. Bury wasn't smiling. When
they were airborne, he looked to Ruth. "What did Kevin do this time?"

     "Eh?"

     "The Secret Service asked me to verify that this was indeed my
pilot, Sir Kevin Renner. Asked me."

     "Oh," Ruth said. "Well, he did talk about lobbing an atom bomb at
the Palace."

     Bury did not look amused. "I would prefer not to be thrown off this
planet."

     "It wouldn't help my career much," Ruth said. "Look, maybe I better
talk to them."

     "You need not bother," Bury said. "Once they were certain of his
identity they lost interest."

     "Now I know I want to see your file, Kevin," Ruth said.

     The limousine stayed low over the outskirts of the central
district. Massive granite buildings stood next to parks.

     Ruth stared through binoculars. "Department of Public Health," she
read. "Stock Exchange. Wow, that's the Colonial Office! It doesn't look
big enough."

     "Nor is it," Bury said. "That building houses the offices that
might be of interest to the general public, and the secretary of state.
The computer and most of the offices are scattered all over the city.
Many are below ground.'

     "Maybe someday they'll build a new building and put everything in
one place," Ruth said,

     Bury chuckled. "That is the new building. You would not suppose its
cost, most of it paid for by taxes on interstellar trade."

     "It doesn't look new," Renner said.

     'No government building looks new," Bury said. "They are
deliberately done in classical styles. Some show Russian influence."

     "I see plenty of skyscrapers and tall walls, though," Renner said.
"Certainly. Sparta is the financial center of the Empire," Bury said.
"Land near the city is very costly. Only the government could afford
anything as inefficient as classical architecture. Ah. To illustrate-"

     He pointed. "The Blaine Institute."

     The Institute looked south at ocean beaches. The complex of
buildings rose up the side of a steep cliff. Balconies broke the steep
lines, and halfway up was a large flat roof dotted with small trees and
picnic tables.

     The limousine landed on the roof. Two ramrod-straight young men
opened the doors and helped Bury into his travel chair. The ocean breeze
was brisk on the rooftop. Sunlight danced on wavetops below, Ruth
stretched and took a deep breath. She turned to Renner, but he wasn't
looking at her.

     Renner stared at a large elderly man in police uniform coming
toward them. "Kelley," he said. "Gunner Kelley."

     "That's me, Sir Kevin. Your Excellency."

     "By damn, it is you. Ruth, this is Gunner Kelley. Imperial Marines.
He was in MacArthur. Kelley, this is Lieutenant Commander Ruth Cohen."

     "Pleased to meet you, ma'am."

     "I thought that was a police uniform," Renner said.

     "Well, it sort of is," Kelley said. "I'm security chief here at the
Institute. But there's not a lot of need for that, so I've got plenty of
time to greet visitors. The Earl will be glad to see you."

     "Earl?" Renner said. "Isn't Blaine Marquis of Crucis?"

     "No sir," Kelley said. "Not yet. The Marquis isn't as young as he
used to be, but he still gets to Parliament." He gestured. One of the
uniformed staff opened the door to the interior. Another guided Bury's
travel chair.

     The inside corridor was short. Scenes from Mote Prime decorated the
walls. At the end of the corridor was a semicircular reception desk. The
receptionist wore a skirted version of Kelley's uniform, and a
businesslike sidearm. She held out thick badges on a tray. Their names
and pictures were already on the badges.

     "Welcome, Your Excellency. Sir Kevin. Commander Cohen," the
receptionist said. "If you'll just thumbprint the badges..."

     When Renner touched his thumb to the badge, it glowed softly green.

     "Thank you. Please be sure to wear these at all times. Enjoy your
stay."

     There were three elevators beyond the reception desk. Kelley passed
them all and indicated a fourth around the corner, marked PRIVATE.
Renner noted buttons for thirty-eight floors. Kelley used a key before
punching the button for twenty-four.

     When they were inside, Renner frowned. "I thought you said there
wasn't much need for security."

     "No, I said there wasn't much need for a security chief," Kelley
said. "And there isn't. I've got a good staff."

     "Do you often have trouble, then?" Bury asked.

     "Not too much, Your Excellency. But we have had some threats. There
are people who don't like Moties. Don't want us studying them."

     The twenty-fourth floor was paneled in dark wood, and thickly
carpeted. The walls were hung with photographs. Ruth stared at one of
them. "Kevin-Kevin, that's you." Renner looked. "Yep, in the Museum on
Mote Prime. That statue-that was the time machine."

     "What?" She started to laugh, changed her mind, and looked more
carefully.

     "Didn't work."

     "Ugh. What are those things attacking? The, uh, time machine?"

     "Evil, aren't they? The Moties told us they were mythical demons
defending the structure of reality. Later we found out they were
Warrior-class Moties. You would not want those loose in the Empire."

     Kelley led them to the end of the corridor, knocked, and opened a
walnut door. "My Lady. M'Lord, your visitors."

 

 

 

     Rod Blaine stood as the others entered. He was far enough away that
he didn't have to shake hands. "Welcome to the Institute, Your
Excellency. Delighted to see you again. Kevin, you're looking good.
Civilian life must suit you.'

     Bury managed to stand and bow. "My Lady. Lord Blaine. And may I
present Lieutenant Commander Ruth Cohen. She is traveling with
us."Kelley excused himself and closed the door.

"My Lady," Ruth said. She bowed to Rod.

     Rod took her hand and kissed it. "Welcome to the Institute,
Commander." Her ears were turning pink. Easily flustered, Rod thought.
Traveling with Kevin Renner should have cured her of that.

Bury sat carefully. "If you'll excuse me "Oh, certainly," Sally said.

     "It's been a while," Rod said. "Kevin, how have things worked out
for you?"

     "Not as bad as I thought they would. By the way, Ruth knows our
dread secret. Most of it, anyway." Renner turned to Sally. "We heard
about your uncle. Sorry. He was a good man, even if he did force me into
a career of espionage."

     Sally nodded. "Thank you. Uncle Ben never would take care of himself."

     Ruth looked wide-eyed. "Uncle Ben-that would be Senator Benjamin
Fowler. Kevin, the Prime Minister recruited you into the Secret Service?"

     Renner laughed. "No, Lord Blaine did that. Senator Fowler declared
an emergency so my discharge wasn't any good."

     "What can we do for you, Excellency?" Rod asked.

"Why, nothing, really..."

     "Your Excellency, it has been a busy day, and while I understand
the custom of circumnavigating the subject before mentioning it, Lady
Sally and I have a great deal more work to do."

     "Ah. Thank you, my Lord," Bury said. His smile didn't seem forced.
"I hope to persuade you to use your influence with the Navy. My Lord,
the blockade is now a quarter of a century old. We do not agree about
the Moties. You see opportunities where I~ see threats. Yet you agreed
to bottle them within their own solar system. As did you, my Lady. We
are all agreed that the situation cannot continue forever'

     "Yeah, we can accept that," Rod said. "We bought some time."

"What do you want from us?" Sally asked. She was no longer trying to be
polite.

     "More time," Bury said firmly. "My lady, I must know that the
blockade is effective. I wish to look for myself. I wish to talk to
those closest to the problem. I want to look for alternatives, to see
what we-what the Empire of Man-can do to be certain that the Moties will
not free themselves and explode through the Empire."

     "That's a big order," Rod said.

     Bury said nothing.

     "Horace wants Navy clearance to go have a look at the Crazy Eddie
Squadron," Renner said.

     Bury nodded in tiny motions. "Precisely."

"Not our decision," Sally said quickly.

Bury looked steadily at Rod Blaine.

     Rod spread his hands without shrugging. "As Lady Sally says, it
isn't our decision. We gave up our seats on the Commission years ago,
when we moved the Institute to Sparta. But consider this, Excellency.
How could anyone prove that the Moties are safely locked up?"

     Bury ignored Blaine's tone. "I must see." The trader looked
terribly old, terribly tired. "I have defended the Empire. I have
ignored the real threat while I confined myself to thwarting treason and
Outie plots. Nuisances. I will continue to do so, but I must know that
the real border is defended. You, think I can never be satisfied. You
may even be right. But I must see for myself. I have earned that right."

     Rod looked at Sally

     "Earned it," Bury insisted. "I doubt that the Empire enjoys a more
effective intelligence team than Kevin Renner and me. And I tell you,
Lord Blaine, I must see!"

     "You've made your point," Rod said. "I understand that you find
this a serious matter." He looked at Sally again. "We have some
developments here, too."

     Sally cleared her throat. "Rod, we've got a meeting. Rod glanced at
the clock on the wall. "Sorry, I'm letting the time get away.
Excellency, we're delighted to see you, but we do have a meeting with a
parliamentary committee. Would you like to see what we're doing here?"

     "I sure would, Captain," Renner said. "I mean, my Lord."

     Blaine chuckled. "Good. We thought you might." He looked upat the
ceiling. "Fyunch(click)."

     The ceiling answered. "Sir."

     "Ask Jennifer to come in. I'm sure you'll all like your guide.

     She's a graduate student in xenosociology, and she's been dying to
meet the other people who've been to the Mote."

 

     "Rod-"

Blaine waited until the door closed behind Renner. "Yeah."

     "I do not want that man out there! Our son is in that fleet."

     "I thought of that."

     "He's a traitor," Sally said. "All right, we use him, but he
doesn't have any real loyalty to the Empire. Money." She sniffed.
"That's all he cares about. He'd sell us to the Moties for enough money."

     Rod nodded thoughtfully. "I expect it would do no harm to have a
few words with our friends in the Palace." He grinned.

     "That's an evil look."

     "His Excellency is due for a shock."

     "Yes-are you sure you want to tell him?"

     "Sally, we'll be announcing it in four days. Bury will know. We
might as well get some mileage out of telling him. Hell, he may know
already."

     "No, I don't believe that."

     "Anyway-Sally, he committed treason a quarter of a century ago, but
he's right this time. The blockade bought time, but it's no solution.
Sooner or later, either we'll have an Empire of two intelligent species,
or a war of extermination. Sally, the Empire's going to have plenty of
people who think like Bury. At least he's been there! Maybe he could be
useful."

     "I'd sooner convert hive rats to the Church," Sally said. "But
you're right, he'll find out sooner or later, and he's a good test case.
I want to see his face. We'll know how good his spies are then..."

 

     *    *    *

 

     Jennifer Banda was an inch over Renner's height, lean and dark,
with just enough length of hair to suggest a white ancestor. When they
were introduced, she was polite to Ruth Cohen, deferential to Renner,
and almost fawned on Horace Bury.

     Watusi genes, Renner speculated. If she's not dark enough, it's
Sparta's weak excuse for a star.

     "What would you like to see?" Jennifer had asked, and when no one
knew what to say, she continued, "We can start with some of the specimen
collections. There's sort of a meeting in the grad student lounge in
about an hour~ Would you like to go to that?"

     "Yes, please," Renner said quickly.

     "'About,' "Ruth Cohen said, mimicking the odd way that Jennifer had
pronounced the word. "Vancouver, New Washington."

     Jennifer Banda turned, startled. "Yes-"

     Ruth grinned. "I'm from Astoria. Glad you weren't playing
basketball when we had to play Vancouver."

     Renner watched Jennifer moving ahead of him to the elevators. Nice
sway to the girl. Good muscular control . . . and New Washington gravity
had about .93 standard gee. She must have been one hell of an athlete.
She must also have had a hell of a time adjusting to Spartan gravity,
but clearly she'd done it.

     The elevator opened onto a corridor lined with display cases.
Jennifer led the way past them. She turned at the far end to find Renner
ambling at leisure, peering at Mai Tai parasol fungi and huge-headed
glider snakes and ponds of oddly colored water with microscope screens
attached. .. . He sighed and moved briskly to join them.

     At the far end was a conference room with refreshments, a large
table, and a hologram wall.

 

     "We've got specimens from four hundred Imperial worlds and thirty
Outie planets," Jennifer said. "Too many. There's no room to set up live
demonstrations, so mostly we have holograms. Wanora!"

     "Ready," the ceiling said.

     "My sequence one, please."

"Certainly."

     A series of holograms formed at the far end of the room.

     "These are from water worlds," Jennifer said. "Just about every one
alike. Four fins, a head, and a tail. Like us."

     Another series of holograms formed. "Then there are forms evolved
from planets without much water. Theory says they crawled out earlier.
Six: and eight-limbed forms. The Tabletop Crazylegs with eighteen. But
again all symmetric."

     "You have holograms of-how many do you have?" Bury asked.

     "Excellency, we try to be complete."

     "Do you have the Levantine Honeypot?"

     "Minm? Wanora! Levantine Honeypot."

     The holograph display showed what looked like a grossly misshapen
barrel, with bright flowers at its top. Small birdlike creatures
fluttered around it. Abruptly, slender tendrils shot up from the edge of
the barrel to entangle one of the fliers and drag it out of sight.

     "What is that?" Ruth Cohen asked.

     "I confess it's new to me," Jennifer said. Text was scrolling
across the screen: "Kaybo Sietzus. Local Anglic name is the Levantine
Honeypot. Largely sessile carnivorous animal.

     "The Honeypot is one of the largest known animal life-forms to
display radial but not bilateral symmetry. Its biochemistry was thought
to be unique until 3030 when Ricardo haLevy described the life cycle of
the Tabletop Ground Hag, whose larval form uses similar enzyme processes."

     "Ugly thing," Renner said.

     "They're not very common," Bury said. "Never more than one in an
oasis. Usually none at all. They can't move fast, and dogs like to eat
them." He read quickly. "Interesting. When I was in school, the Honeypot
was used as an example of why panspermia wasn't true. Totally unique and
all that. I hadn't heard there was anything like it. I take it that the
Elaine Institute accepts the panspermia theory?"

     "Most of us, Excellency," Jennifer said.

     Bury chuckled at the note of surprise. "Traders do not spend all
their time reading commodity price reports."

"Clearly."

     "Panspermia?" Ruth Cohen said.

     "An old theory, from before CoDominium times," Jennifer Banda said.
"The notion is that life is so improbable that it can happen only once
in a galaxy."

     "Omnia cellula e cellula," Renner muttered.

     Ruth frowned at him.

     "Sorry. A phrase they taught in school, All cells come from cells.
No spontaneous generation of life. It was an early experiment in
scientific discovery."

     "Right," Jennifer said. "So the theory is that eventually all
successful life-forms evolve a means of reproducing across interstellar
distances. When we got out into space, we found there were organics all
over the place, and they could cross interstellar distances by hopping
rides with comet clouds. Sometime back then, I guess during the early
days of the First Empire, a scientist named Sir Fred Hoyle postulated
that an intelligent entity was deliberately sending biochemical messages
through the galaxy."

     "You don't believe that, do you?" Ruth asked.

     Jennifer shrugged. "Not really, but you know, for all that people
keep saying Sir Fred must have been off his head, we've never been able
to disprove it. Space is just rich with improbable organics." She paused
for a moment. "I think the Moties believe it."

     Bury looked at her critically. "How could you possibly knowthat?"

     "Oh. Sorry. I've been trying to think like a Motie so long
sometimes I forget. I mean, I think the Moties will believe it."

     The holograms continued. A score of worlds had jet black plants.
"It's based on selenium and it's a lot more complicated than
chlorophyll," Jennifer said. "But again we can find copies in
interstellar organics. If this stuff gets rooted first, chlorophyll
doesn't have a chance because the black plants use yellow sunlight better.

     "Dry worlds are different. More limbs, usually. But still
symmetry," Jennifer said. "Always symmetry. That's the puzzle. If
only   you'd brought back some seeds or something from Mote Prime!"

     Renner laughed (and Bury didn't). "Admiral Kutuzov went to great
lengths to prevent that. Jennifer, we pretty well accepted that all the
asymmetrical forms were derived from the Engineer class, and they
evolved the three arms after they were intelligent."

     "Yes, they believe that, too. But of course they don't remember."

     Bury looked at her quickly, but she had turned back to the
holographic displays.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 Jock

 

 

When We said to the angels:

"Bow before Adam in adoration,"

they all bowed but Iblis.

He was one of the djinni and rebelled

against his Lord's command.

And yet you take him and his offspring

us your friends.

 

-Al-Qur'an

 

 

 

 

"This way," Jennifer Banda said. She ushered them into a
twenty-fourth-floor windowed room that ran most of the length of the
Institute. A dozen people in their twenties sat at tables or poured
themselves coffee from an Imperial Autonetics urn. One wall of the room
was French doors leading onto a veranda cantilevered out over the beach
area far below. The brisk wind smelled of seawater.

     "Quite a view," Ruth Cohen said.

     Kevin Renner nodded absently. The atmosphere was odd. A dozen
graduate students. They all knew that Kevin Renner and Horace Bury had
been to Mote Prime-and they were all looking at each other, or out at a
spectacular view that they had certainly seen before.

     McQuorquodale. Philosophic Journal, about six months ago," someone
said. Studies of a humming dragon in motion."

     "But it's not my field."

     "It'll still be on the test. Depend on it."

     Jennifer led them out to the balcony. Renner went to the rail and
looked over, then noticed that Ruth Cohen had stayed near the door.

     "Acrophobia?"

     "Maybe a little." She sat at a table near the wall, and after a
moment Bury wheeled his travel chair to join her. Renner leaned against
the railing and enjoyed the view while listening to the conversations
behind him.

     A female voice waxed eloquent about the importance of parasites in
ecologies, while her male companion pretended interest. Renner
remembered similar conversations when he was that age and sympathized.

     Two students at the next table sipped tea. "I still say it isn't
fair. I'm in political science, for God's sake. I'll never need to know
anything about organic chemistry that I can't find on the computer."

     "That's what you get to prove next week," another said. He
chuckled. "I offered to help, Miriam Anne."

     Renner took a seat between Ruth Cohen and Jennifer Banda. "Nice
place." He scratched his head. "Okay, I give up."

     Jennifer Banda raised an eyebrow.

     "This is Blaine Institute, the primary center for the study of
Moties. Here are two people who've been on Mote Prime. And no one's
interested in us."

     "Polite," Jennifer said. "They were warned not to bother you."

     "Ah." It was the explanation Renner had expected, but he still felt
something was wrong.

     "We've all studied your flick, Sir Kevin. And every Imperial
Autonetics report that mentions the Mote."

     "Commendable," Bury said. "And of course you had the Moties to
study. I presume holograms were made of everything they said."

 

     Jennifer's answer was drowned out as the girl at the next table
choked on her drink, then set it down with exaggerated care.

     "What have you learned?" Bury asked.

     "Well, we've compiled a general history of the Mote," Jennifer
said. "As much as Jock and Charlie could remember."

     "Jock and Charlie?" Ruth asked.

     "Jock and Charlie and Ivan were the ambassadors from Mote Prime,"
Jennifer said. "Admiral Kutuzov couldn't refuse them. But you have to
remember, they don't represent the whole system; not even the planet.
Just one government, or even one extended family, among maybe tens of
thousands."

     "King Peter," Bury said, "Of course he wasn't really a king and the
government wasn't really a monarchy, but that is the name they chose in
hopes that it would sound familiar to us. They knew us that well, even
then."

     Jennifer nodded. "They certainly learned more about us than we did
about them. They sent three ambassadors, a Master and two Mediators.
Ruth, you know about Masters and Mediators? Moties are a differentiated
species with a lot of different castes. The Masters give the orders and
the Mediators talk for them. Anyway, they called the Master
'Ivan-probably because Admiral Kutuzov was in charge of the expedition
and they thought the Russians were Masters in the Empire-and the
Mediators got the names Jock and Charlie. Ivan died first, but he never
talked much except through the Mediators so we didn't learn much from
him. Then-anyway, as His Excellency said, we made holos of everything we
could, Of course, once you get back a couple of cycles there wasn't much
detail."

     "Cycles," Ruth said. "I saw a lot about that in school. It's about
all I remember about Moties."

     "Too right," Renner said. "Everything about the Mote was cycles.
Civilizations rise and fall."

     "Sometimes incredibly fast," Jennifer said. "And they tried
everything! Industrial feudalism, communism, capitalism, things we never
even thought of. Anyway, we got lots of stories, what we'd call folk
legends, but not much history."

     "There couldn't be," Ruth Cohen said. "It takes continuity to make
history. I can feel sorry for the Moties."

     "I pity them, too," Bury said. "Who could not? They die in agony if
they can't become pregnant and give birth. Endless population expansion,
endless wars for limited resources. Sometimes I fear that only I can see
how dangerous that makes them. Jennifer, we visited Mote Prime. A world
crowded beyond description, with complex competitions for power and
prestige. We were told it would collapse soon, and I believed them. We
also saw signs of a civilization in the asteroid belt. Jacob Buckman
told me that many of the asteroids had been moved.'

     "I'm surprised he noticed," Renner said.

     "He lost interest in them after he found out," Bury said.

     Jennifer laughed. The couple at the next table had fallen silent.
They were joined by two other students who also pretended not to listen.

     "We learned nothing important about the asteroid civilization,"

Bury said. "That has always concerned me. Perhaps you know more, now?"

     "Not a lot," Jennifer said. "The-our Moties had never visited the
asteroids. Jock believed that the Trailing Trojans were in an ascendant
imperial phase, but he was never certain."

     "The industrial feudalism on Mote Prime will long since have
collapsed," Bury said. "Other systems will be emerging. Or perhaps
nothing but savagery."

     "Oh, surely not," the girl at the next table said.

     "Circles," Renner said. "You didn't see them."

     "Circles?" Ruth Cohen asked.

     Before Renner could answer, the girl at the next table stood and
bowed slightly. "Miriam Anne Vukcik. Political history. This is Tom
Boyarski. May we join you?"

     "Please do," Bury said.

     "Circles?" Ruth asked again.

     Renner said, "The circles were the first thing you saw from orbit.
Craters everywhere, big and little, and all old, all across Mote Prime.
Seas and lakes. One lopsided crater skewed by an earthquake fault line,
one across a mountain range . . . you get the idea."

     "The great asteroid war. Our Moties didn't remember anything about
it," Miriam said.

     "They think in circles, too. Cycles. Rise and fall. Population
growth and then a war. They keep their museums to help the next
civilization get itself together. They don't even try to stop it
anymore. They're too old. It's been going on too long."

     Miriam said, "Crazy Eddie-"

     Yeah, Crazy Eddie tries to stop it."

     "I don't think I understand the Crazy Eddie myth-figure. We have
plenty of legends about the coming of the Messiah and about holy madmen,
but no human culture ever pinned all its hopes for the future on a
savior who had to be crazy."

     "Don Quixote?" Ruth Cohen grinned.

     Jennifer nodded agreement. "Good point."

     "Humans try the impossible. It's part of our nature," Tom Boyarski
said. "Submitting to the inevitable is a big part of Motie nature."

"But Jock really liked Don Quixote," Jennifer Banda said.

     "They liked the Persian story about the man who told the king he
could teach a horse to sing," Tom said. "And maybe they understood
intellectually. But not at a gut level." He laughed. "That's all right.
We know a lot about them, too, but deep down they're still a big mystery."

     "And always will be," Miriam said.

     "No," Tom said. "Next time, we'll know more about what to study.
Next time we'll find out."

     "Next time," Bury said. "You are planning a new expedition to the
Mote?"

     Tom looked startled, then laughed. "I don't have the funding." For
a moment he must have considered; but he wasn't young enough to suggest
that Horace Bury did. "No one is," Tom said. "No one I know of, anyway.
But sooner or later there's got to be one."

     Jennifer Banda's pocket computer chimed. She looked embarrassed,
but she stood up and said, "Excuse me, people. I was told to take you
back to Lady Blaine's office."

     Bury set his chair in motion. Renner stood up. "You don't
understand, and that's the truth," he said. "Crazy Eddie is supposed to
fail."

 

     Instead of the receptionist, there was another woman, younger and
blond and expensively dressed, in the receiving area outside Lady Sally
Blaine's office. Renner had seen a picture of Glenda Ruth Fowler Blaine,
but he wouldn't have needed that. She had the same finely chiseled
features and penetrating eyes as her mother.

     "Sir Kevin, Your Excellency," she said. Her eyes twinkled. "I
thought I'd introduce myself before my parents made it all formal." Her
smile was infectious. "Kevin, I'm delighted to meet you! Your
Excellency, did you know my brother was named for your pilot?'

"No, my Lady- She nodded. Kevin Christian. We mostly call him Chris. Mom
doesn't like us chattering about family. Did they ever tell you, Kevin?
But you guessed anyway. Kevin, I still have the christening cup you
Sent. Thank you, and thank you, too, Your Excellency! There wasn't
anything like that for sale for years."

     "It was crafted in our laboratories, my Lady," Bury said. His smile
was genuine. "I'm pleased that you remembered."

     "It still delivers the best-tasting milk on Sparta." Glenda Ruth
pointed to the wall clock display of the dark and light areas of Sparta.
"They're waiting for us. Uh-I'm not supposed to tell, but I hope you're
prepared for a surprise." She held the door open for Bury's travel chair,

     There was something about Jennifer Banda's smile as she and Glenda
Ruth ushered them into Lady Blaine's office. Both Blaines were wearing
that same conspiratorial smile. The air of mystery was getting on
Renner's nerves.

     There was another occupant.

     He stood up slowly from his oddly designed travel chair, and bowed.
A hairy, grinning, hunchbacked dwarf, not just short but grotesquely
misshapen, too. You don't stare at a dwarf, and Renner was in control of
his expression, but he lost it all when the stranger bowed. His backbone
jutted, broken in two places.

     The mind would always misinterpret that first sight.

     It stood four and a half feet tall. It was hairy. The brown and
white markings were still visible, though they had shaded mostly to
white. There was one big ear on the right side, and no room for one on
the left; the massive shoulder muscles ran right up to knobs at the top
of the misshaped skull. There were two slender right arms. The
dolphin-grin was simply the shape of its face.

     Renner gaped. For a moment he couldn't take his eyes off it and
then he remembered Bury.

     Horace Bury's face was all the wrong colors. He'd opened the case
in the arm of his travel chair, but his hands were shaking too badly to
deal with the diagnostic sleeve. Renner slipped it into place. The
system began feeding Bury tranquilizers at once. Renner studied the
readings for a moment before he looked up.

     "Captain, that was nasty. I mean my Lord. My Lord Blaine, you could
have killed him, dammit!"

     "Dad, I told you-"

Earl Blaine nibbled his lip. "I hadn't thought. Your Excellency..."

     Bury was furious, but he had it under control. "An excellent joke,
my Lord. Excellent. Who are you?"

     The Motie said, "I'm Jock, Excellency. It's good to see you in such
health."

     Yes. It must be, considering. I find it stunning to see you in such
health. Did you lie to us? Mediators die around age twenty-five, you
said. All Moties die if they cannot be made pregnant, and the Mediators
are mules. Sterile, you said."

     Renner said, "Between the legs."

     Bury looked. "Male? Allah's . . . blessing. Lord Blaine-Lady
Blaine-this is a stunning achievement. How?"

     Sally Blaine said, "Fyunch(click), give us Charlie 490."

     There was a holowall. Understandably, Renner had not noticed it.
Now it showed what looked to be shadows of a CAT scan, the interior of
something not human. A Motie, of course. The hips: one intricate and
massive joint in backbones as solid as the bones of a human leg. Mote
Prime had never invented vertebrae.

     The camera zoomed within the abdomen. A white arrowhead pointed to
tiny tadpole-shapes clinging to the abdominal wall.

     "That," Lady Sandra Fowler Blaine said, "is the C-L worm. We did
gene-tailoring on a symbiote in the digestive tract. Now it secrets male
hormone. It was already secreting something a lot like it. This wasn't
the first thing we tried, but we tried all kinds of things, and this
didn't get enough attention. Ivan died before we were ready. We think
Charlie was killed by the physiological change, female to male. He was
too old."

     Bury's color was better. "You've broken the Motie breeding cycle."

     "We've repaired the cycle, Your Excellency," Lady Blaine said
coolly. "It's broken in Mediators. Child, male, female, pregnant, male,
female, pregnant, that's how it goes with Motie classes. But Mediators
are sterile mules, so they're only male once, and they die young.

     "We only had three Moties to test, but we could ask questions. When
a Motie's been male awhile, the single testis withers and the Motie goes
female. Giving birth excites cells in the birth canal, and more testes
form, but only one grows to term."

     "He's carrying more than one of your worms," Renner pointed

out.

     "We worried about that, but it's not a problem," Glenda Ruth said.
"The kidney flushes the extra hormone. This is an old, well established
Motie parasite. It had already evolved practically to symbiote stage. It
won't overbreed inside its host. The hormone itself inhibits that, and
the worm long ago developed other mechanisms to protect the host."

     Bury's eyes flicked to Renner's. They must have been thinking
exactly alike: there'd be no problem transporting the symbiote.

     Bury said, "What next, my Lady?"

     Sally nibbled her lip. "We don't know. Kevin? I think you
understood the Crazy Eddie concept better than most of us. Would they
want this?"

     "Of course they will!" Glenda Ruth said.

     Sally looked at her daughter coldly, then turned back to Renner.

     "Does this make them fertile?" Renner asked.

     "No. Not Mediators, anyway," Sally said.

     "Keepers," Renner said.

     Bury nodded. Keepers were sterile male Masters, less ambitiously
territorial than most Motie Masters. The title came from the Keepers of
the Museums and other public facilities, and three Imperial midshipmen
had died to find that out.

     Renner grinned suddenly. "Mediators would want it. Masters would
want it for their enemies. But you don't know it works on Masters."

     "No. But it does work on Mediators. And if we had a Master to
test..." "Kevin," Bury said.

     "Yeah?" Bury still looked sick, Renner glanced at the clock face on
the travel chair. A dull orange light glowed on its face. "Yeah, you've
got to get ready for dinner at the Traders Guild. My Lord, my Lady-'

     "We should speak further on this." Bury seemed to have trouble
manipulating his lips. "Later. You have a, an exceedingly powerful . . .
tool."

     "We know it," Rod Blaine said. "We won't forget. How long will you
be on Sparta, Kevin?'

     "Say two weeks. Maybe three." As long as it takes, Renner thought.
Now, if not before.

     "Kevin, let's have dinner," Glenda Ruth said. "I mean, no one can
get mad if a girl has dinner with her brother's godfather." She looked
at her mother and smiled sweetly. Can they?"

 

     Renner was sleeping like a baby, but the door chime snappedhim
awake. He asked, "Horvendile, is Bury present?"

     "His Excellency has just entered."

     Ruth stirred. "Kevin? What is it?"

     "I think I should go hold Bury's hand."

     Nabil passed him at the door to the parlor. Renner asked, "How is
he? Is he likely to want to talk?"

     "He ordered hot chocolate," Nabil said.

     "Okay. Two."

     The travel chair was in the middle of the rug. Bury was looking
straight ahead, motionless, like a stuffed dummy. Presently he said, "I
was affable."

     "I'm impressed. What was His Highness like?"

     "He will not become 'His Highness' until he assumes his duties as
Viceroy." Bury shook his head slightly. "We were at the same table, but
several seats apart. Later, many crowded around him in the clubrooms. I
formed the impression of intelligence and charisma, but that would be
apparent from his career. Really I learned nothing I had not known, but
at least we have been formally introduced, and I detected no signs of
distaste."

     "So what's next?"

     "I persuaded him to come to dinner Thursday. It was the only time
slot he had. He can listen to me and Jacob reminisce."

     "That'll tell him if he wants to travel with us to New Cal."

     "Yes. Horvendile, determine Lord Andrew Mercer Calvin's preferences
in food and entertainment. Kevin, we must go. These happy lords never
really saw the problem, and now they think they have a solution!"

     "You've got to admit, they've got a piece of one."

     "Hoskins sees profit from the Mote. The Blaines will want to try
out their new toy. The graduate student, Boyarski, wants to play
tourist. He was right. There will certainly be another expedition, if
the blockade doesn't fail first."

     "I know. What people know how to do, they do eventually.

     Look at Earth."

     "There's another thing. The Blaine girl will want to go to the
Mote. With her family's influence-"

     "Yep. She'll inherit power all right. Glenda Ruth. Nice of her to
remember our present."

     "Kevin, of course she remembers, because she knows it gives you
pleasure that she does. As she was delightfully at the edge of informal
familiarity with me."

     It took Renner a moment to see what he meant. "Oh, my God. Raised
by Motie Mediators. She's going to make one hell of a diplomat."

     Nabil brought mugs of chocolate. Bury used his to warm his hands.
"The Crazy Eddie Squadron. If they know how important their work is. The
expedition to the Mote, when it comes, would have to go through the
blockade."

     "Forget it, Horace. The Navy obeys orders."

     "They swear an oath." Bury tapped at the keyboard in his chair. The
wall lit.

     "I solemnly swear to uphold and defend the Empire of Man against
all enemies foreign and domestic and to extend the protection of the
Empire to all humans; to obey the lawful orders of my superiors, and to
uphold and defend as sovereign the legitimate heirs descendant of
Lysander the Great; and to bring about the unity of mankind within the
Empire of Man."

     "You see? Their oath would force them to halt the expedition, if I
show it to be a danger."

     "Forget it, Horace. Oaths are one thing, courts-martial are
another. But look at it this way. If worse came to worst-say, if an
expedition actually went and brought back a Master and his household. Or
if a Motie ship got through the Jump points and as far as New Cal and as
far as, oh, personal conducted interviews with the interstellar news
media. It could become politically impossible to just wipe them out.
You've had such thoughts, haven't you?'

     "I have. A Motie household with a Mediator to swear that they left
their Warriors-and Watchmakers-home."

     "But now we could sterilize them without hurting them. It's better,
Horace. Now, why don't you go to sleep. The Secret Service expects us to
be bright eyed and bouncy tomorrow.

     The look Bury gave him would have imbued a stone statue with pity,
or at least fear.

 

 

4 Veto

 

 

I have lived to thank God that all my prayers have not been answered.

-Jean Ingelow

 

The Yeoman First Class was clearly impressed. Bury guessed that she'd
never before met an Imperial Magnate; she was certainly unfamiliar with
his titles. Even so, she worked at being casual, and at covering the
fact that Bury was kept waiting ten minutes past the time of his appointment

     "Captain Cunningham will see you now, Your Excellency," she said.
I'm sorry about the delay. We've been really busy this week, I've never
seen anything like it." She got up and opened the door to Cunningham's
office as Bury directed his travel chair.

     In twenty-five years Bury had only had three case officers, he had
no trouble recognizing Captain Raphael Cunningham. They'd never met, but
there had been hologram messages. Cunningham looked like a child: a head
round as a bowling ball, ringed in fluffy white, and a button nose and
pursed mouth. Bury knew everything published about Cunningham's
background and career; additionally, what he knew of the officer's
childhood and family connections might or might not have startled his
case officer. Presumably the Navy understood that Horace Bury left
little to chance.

     His investigations had been disappointing if unsurprising. There
were few levers on Raphael Cunningham. His forty-year Navy career was
not particularly distinguished, but it was certainly unblemished. Bury's
agents suspected that Cunningham had not been entirely faithful to his
wife, but they couldn't prove it.

     Fools, Bury thought. The Navy cared more about appearances than
reality.

     It was an effort to stand in Sparta's gravity, but Bury managed it
without a grimace. He bowed slightly; he had learned long ago to wait
for some gesture before offering his hand to any Imperial officer.

     Cunningham's smile was broad, and he came from behind his desk to
go to Bury. "Excellency, it's a pleasure to meet you after all these
years." His handshake was firm but brief.

     So, Bury thought. I am kept waiting for ten minutes, but his
secretary apologizes. He will meet me halfway. A very correct man is
Captain Cunningham.

     "Excellency, I confess I never expected to meet you."

     "Regrettably, my work does not permit me to visit Sparta often."

     "I took the liberty of ordering coffee." Cunningham touched a
square inlaid on his desk, and an orderly came in with a tray. He put a
large Navy mug on Cunningham's desk, and a smaller cup of black Turkish
coffee at Bury's elbow.

     "Thank you." Bury raised his cup. 'To our continued cooperation."

     "I can certainly wish for that," Cunningham said.

     Bury sipped his coffee. Of course, cooperation may be too strong a
word. Given the costs and rewards..."

     Cunningham frowned slightly. "I expect I don't know all the costs,
but as to rewards, I confess some puzzlement, Excellency. We don't have
much besides honors to give. Your work in the Maxroy's Purchase affair
merits commendation, but you have refused additional honors. May I ask why?"

     Bury shrugged. I am certainly not unappreciative of Imperial
honors, but perhaps they have less-utility-to me. I thank you for the
offers, but there is something else I desire a great deal more."

     Cunningham raised an eyebrow.

     "Captain, you will long have known that I consider Mote Prime the
greatest threat to humanity since the Dinosaur Killer struck Earth
sixty-five million years ago,

     We differ there. Your Excellency, I like the notion that we're not
alone in the universe. Different minds, with insights different from
ours. Was it the MacArthur thing? The little Watchmaker creatures
swarming all through the ship?"

     Bury repressed a shudder. Cunningham likes Moties. A change of
subject was in order. "My record shows that I am not a fool. I believe
it is no more than a simple statement of fact that the Empire has never
had a more effective intelligence officer than me."

     "I can't quarrel with that. Can't offer counterexamples, anyway.
Bizarre, the way you can- I gather you see patterns in the flow of
money. Is that the way of it?"

     "Money, goods, attitudes. One can see changes in local attitudes by
changes in a world's imports or the inflation rate. I followed these
matters long before I joined your office," Bury said. Twenty-five years
ago I was-persuaded-to aid the Empire. I seek Outie plots and heresies
and treason so that the Empire may concentrate on the real threat. The
Moties! Of course you've read my report on Maxroy's Purchase."

     Cunningham smiled, "'Gripping Hand.' But the Moties hadn't busted
loose after all, had they?"

     "No. Not this time, Captain, but-how can I put this? I-"

     "You were frightened."

     Bury glared. Cunningham raised a big, thick-fingered hand. "Don't
be offended. How would anyone have reacted? Little bitty lopsided faces
looking out of a pressure suit, crawling up a rope just behind you.
Christ! Anyone else might have wound up in a mental institution. You-"
Cunningham laughed suddenly. "You wound up in the Secret Service. Minor
differences."

     Bury spoke low. "Very well. I'm frightened again. I'm frightened
for the Empire of Man."

     "So much so that you can't do your work? I must say, Your
Excellency, that I don't see supervising a long-term naval blockade
operation as . . . requiring your special expertise."

     Cunningham already knew. Bury said, "When I was brought into the
Secret Service, I had no choice. Since then conditions have changed. Do
you believe you could force me to do your will now?"

     Cunningham stiffened. "Excellency, we have never forced you into
anything. You go where you will."

     Bury laughed. "A pity Senator Fowler is not alive to hear you say
that. In any event, my status has gradually become that of a volunteer"

     Cunningham shrugged. "It always has been."

     'Exactly. And you agree that I am valuable to the Empire?"

"Of course."

     "Invaluable and inexpensive, in fact," Bury mused. "So. I will
continue to be. But now I want something."

     "There is no need to be so aggressive. You want a ticket to the
Blockade Squadron," Cunningham said softly.

     "Precisely. Did you learn from Blaine or the ITA?"

     Cunningham laughed. "The Traders don't talk to us. You're serious
about this, aren't you?"

     "Captain-" Bury paused. "Captain Cunningham, one of your most
effective agents is concerned about a potential threat to the Empire. I
am as serious as any other of your madmen. I do not ask for funds, I am
quite capable of paying my own expenses. I control seats on the ITA
Board, and I have-influence-with several members of Parliament."

     Cunningham sighed. 'We're worried about the blockade, too."

     "Oh?" There was something! Bury would not lose face by reaching for
his diagnostic sleeve; not yet.

     "There's a threat to the blockade, yes. Of sorts. Maybe we can
deal. Have you read the recent news stories by Alysia Joyce MeiLing
Trujillo?"

     "You are the second person to ask me that in as many days. No, but
I shall as soon as I return to my rooms."

     "Good. Excellency, that-investigative reporter has been giving us
pure holy hell. I won't say she hasn't found some reason to, but God
damn it! The Crazy Eddie Squadron has been out there forever. Blockade
duty is the worst kind of duty the Navy can assign. Constant possibility
of danger, but mostly boredom. Nothing happens, and nothing happens, and
then-"

     "You were there?"

     "Fifteen years ago. Worst year of my life. I was lucky, it was just
a training assignment. Some ships and crews are stuck out there for
years! Have to be-if we rotate them too often, there's nobody with
experience. Leave them too long though, and-Hell, Excellency, it's no
wonder she's found people screwing things up. Everybody's tempted. I'm
surprised it's not worse. But she's making us look very bad."

     Bury knew he should have read this Mei-Ling's articles last night.
He'd been too upset. "Her dispatches come from New Scotland, don't they?
What has she found? Bribery, inefficiency, price fixing? Nepotism?
Old-boy networking-"

     "All of that. We've got no choice, we have to give her a ticket to
visit the Squadron. It occurred to me that it would be no bad thing if
you took her there."

     Bury mulled it. The more she learns, the more damage she can do."

     "She might. Or she might see dedicated Navy men holding the line
against a credible threat. And I am told you have means of persuasion.
We can give you very complete files on the young lady. And her family.
And friends."

     Bury smiled thinly. He had no doubt that this room was secure, and
that his travel chair would be subject to magnetic fields that would
erase all possible recordings of the conversation; in fact he hadn't
even tried making one. He said, "And for two or three months there would
be no dispatches at all."

     Cunningham nodded. "By the time she sees New Scotland again, we'll
clean up most of what she's complaining about."

     "I will do my best. We haven't met, of course. She may detest me on
sight."

     Cunningham smiled. "If you can't charm her, Kevin Renner can. We're
agreed, then? Then I want to talk to Sir Kevin, and with luck the rest
is formality."

     "Formality?"

     Cunningham shrugged. "Lord Blaine has asked that he be informed.
Surely he would have no objections? I understand you have known him for
many years."

     "More than twenty-five years, Captain," Bury said; and he felt a
cold chill in his stomach.

 

     It was standard practice to interview intelligence officers one at
a time no matter how closely they might work together. They'd been
polite enough to bring Renner and Bury in by separate entrances. Renner
glimpsed Bury's travel chair as it wheeled into the reception room. Then
he was ushered into Cunningham's office.

     Cunningham stood. 'Greetings, Captain. Trust you're well."

     "Fine." Kevin looked wryly at his expensive civilian clothes.
"Didn't know the rank showed."

     Cunningham frowned a question.

     "Forget it." Renner sat in the visitor's chair and took out a pipe.

"Mind?"

     "No, go ahead." Cunningham glanced at the ceiling. "Georgio,
exhaust fans if you please." He tapped keys below a screen that faced
away from Renner. "Georgia" set a brisk breeze moving. "Now, Captain, if
you could just clear up a couple of points about Maxroy's Purchase..."

 

     "...I'm sure aren't worth worrying about," Renner concluded. "My
formal opinion's on record. Governor Jackson not only can handle the
situation, he'll have New Utah voluntarily in the Empire in ten years
without anyone firing a shot."

     Cunningham scratched at the computer entry pad with his stylus.
"Thank you. Excellent report of a very creditable job. I can tell you
privately that the Admiral's pretty well decided to endorse your report."

     "That ought to make Jackson happy."

     Cunningham nodded. "Now. What can you tell us about this latest
scheme of Bury's?"

     Renner spread his hands. "My fault. I came staggering home at one
in the morning, dead drunk and covered with blood, shook the old man
awake and told him, 'The gripping hand!' Dammit, the whole planet was
talking like they've got three arms! Time I finished talking, we were
both convinced the Moties were in Purchase system."

     "But they weren't."

     "No. But they might be somewhere else. I'm with Bury. I want to
know the blockade works."

     "It works."

     "You can't verify that."

     "Captain-"

     When did you last visit the blockade? Spend long enough to be sure
it's puncture proof? Who was minding the store while you were there?
Have you seen clips of the Motie Warriors?" Renner waved it away with a
slicing gesture. "Never mind, Captain. The point is, Bury's determined.
I haven't even tried to talk him out of it. I don't want to."

     In other words, he'll go whether we like it or not?"

     "Let's say he's determined. Besides, what harm can it do? There
aren't many secrets he doesn't know, and of all people he's unlikely to
give the Moties anything. For that matter, if the blockade personnel
ever needed a pep talk, you wouldn't find anyone better than me and
Horace Bury .. . mmm .. . with a tranquilizer drip, maybe"

     "I take it you intend to go along, then?" Cunningham glanced at the
readout screen inlaid on his desk. "You've three times requested
retirement and then changed your mind. God knows nothing's stopping you."

     Renner chuckled. "What would I retire for? I like what I'm doing,
and this way someone else pays the bills. Sure I'll go. I'd like to go
back to the Mote."

     "Nobody's planning that!"

"Not now, maybe, but you'll have to one day"

"You've been with him a long time. Is he-all right?"

     "He's death on Moties. He can smell the money currents between the
stars. Your office never made a better deal."

     "I mean loyal.'

     "I know what you meant," Renner said. "And the answer is yes. He
wasn't always, maybe, but he is now. And why shouldn't he be? He's put
this much of his life into making the Empire stronger. Why throw it away?'

     "Okay." Cunningham looked up. "Georgio. Call Admiral Ogarkov, please."

After a few moments a voice boomed, "As we agreed, sir," Cunningham said.

Bury clearance to visit the Blockade Fleet. He may solve the Mei-Ling
Trujillo problem for us, and he and Sir Kevin may pep up the Crazy Eddie
Squadron. It can't hurt to let him try."

"All right. Talk to Blaine."

"Admiral-

"He won't bite. Thanks. Good-bye." Cunningham made a face. "You don't
get along with the Captain?" Renner asked.

"Earl. Don't have that much to do with him," Cunningham said. "He's not
Navy. Was once, I know, but he hasn't been for a long time. Georgio,
polite mode. I'd like to speak with Lord Blaine. The Earl, not the
Marquis. At his earliest convenience. I think he's expecting the call."

     Bury had hooked up his diagnostic sleeve as soon as he left
Cunningham's office. Cunningham's secretary was trying not to stare. He
wanted to tell her that he wasn't upset-that he only expected to be upset.

     Would Blaine say no?

     He practiced deep breathing until his pulse was steady, then
fingered the control ball.

     "Alysia Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo. Present age twenty-seven Standard
years. Feature columnist Imperial Post-Tribune Syndicate, special
features reporter, Hochsweiler Broadcasting Network. Highly rated.

     "Born New Singapore. Parents Ito Wang Mem-Ling and Regina Trujillo.
One older brother. Ito Wang Mei-Ling is the founder of Mei-Ling Silicon
Works, New Singapore, publicly traded, current price thirty-one and
one-eighth."

     Bury fingered in two questions.

     "Six million shares, of which he retains forty-five percent. Adding
the mother's name is not customary on New Singapore.

     "Alysia Joyce attended Hamilton Prep on Xanadu and graduated cum
laude in journalism from the Cornish School on Churchill. When she
arrived on Sparta, her account in the local branch of the Bank of New
Singapore was opened with a letter of credit for three hundred thousand
crowns. She worked as a volunteer research assistant to Andrea Lundquist
of Hochsweiler at a nominal salary of fifty crowns per week until her
news analysis series was sponsored by Wang Factoring."

     Bury nodded as he listened. New money. Oriental princess out to
save the Empire with her father's money and her mother's name.

     Bury glanced down at the telltales. Blood pressure, heartbeat,
adrenaline level: all acceptable. Why not? Mei-Ling was an investigative
reporter, no different from any other. She thought her wealth protected
her, and surely did not think that it also made her vulnerable. Her
family was worth a hundred million crowns. Only a hundred million crowns.

     What was she doing that the Navy feared? No time to read everything
now, that would have to wait, but he could begin on the summaries.

     "Digest: Series filed from New Caledonia by Alysia Joyce MelLing
Trujillo. Series title: 'The Wall of Gold.'

     Bury listened intently, but there was little to surprise him.
Markups on maintenance and repair. Luxury supplies sent to the blockade
squadron, most obtained without competitive bids. Imperial Autonetics
coffeepots, heh heh.

     Graft . . . she'd already gotten four men arrested. And several
fired from the Navy shipworks on Fomor.

     On Levant, bureaucrats were expected to support themselves by
bribes and extortion and favors. It was a different system, a mere
matter of viewpoint, and not the black-versus-white ethical situation
perceived by the Imperial Navy.

     This kind of thing wouldn't destroy the blockade . . . not if it
were being run by Levantines. Bury's people had a sense of proportion.

     Then again, too much graft could bleed any military effort white.
Then any kind of enemy could charge through the tissue-thin corpse.
According to Trujillo, the grafters were interfering with supplies to
the Blockade Fleet! Freeze-dried food stocks, blackbox replacements. One
David Grant, high in the Planetary Governor's office, had taken half a
billion crowns to replate the blockade ships with Motie superconductor.
The scheme existed only in spurious computer memory, praise Allah. There
was no superconductor plating in the blockade-and shouldn't be on ships
that must regularly descend into a red supergiant star! But what might
that stolen money have bought to strengthen the fleet?

     What if she was right?

     He had to speak to Trujillo. He'd go to New Scotland no matter what
Earl Blaine said; and then perhaps there would be a way into the
blockade. He should learn that anyway, to probe for ways out. So search
for a handle on Mei-Ling Trujillo. Two hundred million crowns would buy
control of her father's company. Who owned the outstanding stock? Bury
tapped keys. Might as well find out.

     The computer scrolled . . . and here:

     "Ito Wang Mei-Ling has retained the services of Reuben Weston
Associates."

     Hah. Most people had never heard of Reuben Weston, but those who
had knew his group as one of the most effective-and expell. sive-public
relations firms in the Empire. They specialized in building contacts at
Court. A New Singapore electronics company wouldn't need that kind of
service; a provincial mini-tycoon with ambitions to increase his rank
most certainly would.

     And Bury might help the man ... but not until he knew how Mei-Ling
Trujillo felt about her father. And he could do nothing while marooned
in this anteroom. What was taking Renner so long?

 

     Cunningham hung up. "Blaine won't have it," he said.

     Damn," Renner said.

     "Yeah. What is it? They were together on the Mote Prime expedition-"

     "No. Something from before. Rumors-" Renner stopped.

     'Something I should know?"

     "Evidently not. Well, Bury's going to be disappointed, and what
happens after that ... I don't know." But he sure won't give up easily. . .

 

 

5 Passengers

 

 

For he possessed the happy gift

Of unaffected conversation;

To skim one topic here, one there,

Keep silent with an expert's air

In too exacting disputation.

 

-Alexander Pushkin

 

Watching news broadcasts over many years had taught Kevin Renner this
much: styles mutated like crazy on Sparta. He knew his clothes didn't
look funny because Cunningham's secretary had steered him to
Cunningham's tailor. His problem was in identifying a maitre d'. A
maitre d' should stand out.

     He watched the other customers.

     She was a lovely statuesque blonde wearing a pantsuit with shoulder
frills, but the tour young men ahead of Renner weren't ogling her, just
waiting to catch her eye. None of the other women in his view wore
shoulder frills. She walked briskly to a small waist-high desk. The
space above the desk was a faint rainbow blur from where Renner was
standing, but from her viewpoint it would be a data display with a mug
shot for identification.

     She led the four away, then came back for Renner. "Good morning.
Table, sir?'

     "A table sounds useful. Kevin Renner, and I'll be joined by a Bruno
Cziller'

     She didn't have to tap keys; she just looked. The computer was
programmed to pick up names. "Welcome to the Three Seasons, Sir Kevin.
I'm very sorry, we don't have your table just yet. Admiral Cziller
hasn't arrived. Would you care to wait in the lounge?"

     "I'll wait here, thank you." He could see empty tables. He watched
her lead another couple past him. Higher rank? But they didn't walk that
way. They were trying to keep up and still watch faces without being
caught. Celebrity hunters.

     "Kevin?"

     "Captain!"

     Cziller wrung his hand. He looked old, softening in the face, but
his hand was still a vise. His voice had turned husky. "Call me

Bruno. I've never seen you in civvies. My, you do like colors!"

     "Is it-"

     "No, you look fine. Hey, I studied your report on Mote Prime, the
one with the funny title. Did you ever think you'd be playing tourist
with another species?"

     "Never did. I owe it all to you."

     The statuesque maitre d' led them to a table next to a
floor-to-ceiling window, with a terrific view out over the harbor.
Renner waited until she was gone, then said, "She gave away some tables
before she let us have one. I wondered why."

     "Rank."

     "Well, that's what I thought, but-"

     "Serves you right for getting a knighthood. You had to have a
window. Wouldn't do to have you sitting with the misters. Sparta's very
rank conscious, Kevin."

     "Uh-huh. The computer says you married."

     "I'd have brought Jennifer, but . . . her sense of humor isn't...mmm"

     "Isn't there?''

     Right."

     "Okay, and I'd have brought one Ruth Cohen, but she's taking a
quickie training course at where she works. How are you holding up
otherwise?"

     "I get the impression I'll last awhile, but-no, never mind."

     "You sick, Bruno?"

     "Not sick. But the last time I went off planet, my doctor gave me
pure hell, and so did Jennifer, of course. Wasn't the gravity, that was
fine, but the longer day had me exhausted half to death. I came back
with walking pneumonia. I can't travel anymore. I'm getting cabin fever.
It's a small world, Kevin."

     "Mmm. You could be in a worse place. You get all the news that's
fit to broadcast, and all the museums worth visiting-"

     "Not all. Tell me about the museum on Mote Prime."

     "That was different. They took us there in big limousines they made
just for us. The other cars were all teeny, and they collapsed flat.
Even the limousine could fold smaller. The museum was all enclosed. One
big building. Artificial environments inside. In one room it was raining
buckets. Moties wanted to lead us in anyway."

     Cziller laughed.

     "We saw too much to take it all in. There was stuff we should have
noticed. There was a wild Porter. Tame Porters are like twofifty
centimeters tall, with two arms, and they carry things. This thing had
three arms, and tusks and claws. It was a little smaller."

     A tubby robot wheeled up, took a drink order, and produced whiskey
screwdrivers. A live waiter followed. A local seabeast was on the menu,
and Renner ordered that. The other offerings were Earth life, uninteresting.

     He said, "One whole floor was a mockup of a ruined city. There were
big five-limbed rats and a camouflaged predator and a lot of other
stuff, a whole ecology evolved to live in ruined cities. We didn't see
the implications right away. We may not know them all yet. . . . No
telling what they've been learning at the Institute, of course. But
Horowitz swore that the city rats are related to the Warriors. We
haven't ever seen a live Warrior yet, but we had the Time Machine
sculpture and a silhouette of the Warrior aboard the colony ship they
sent to New Cal-"

     "War. Continual war."

     "Yeah. With their population problem it's hardly surprising.

Bruno, do you suppose it's possible to find the man who invented the
condom? He deserves a statue somewhere."

     Bruno laughed a long, throaty laugh. "I've missed you, Kevin."

     Food arrived. Kevin listened while they ate, a habit so old that
he'd have had to concentrate not to listen. At the next table some
lordling was complaining bitterly about . . . what? Fishing rights up in
the upper Python River. His family had had exclusive rights, and they'd
been rescinded. Something about the salmon breeding cycle: some lowborn
bureaucrat had decided that the Dinsmark family wasn't keeping the
upstream route sufficiently open.

His companion was insufficiently sympathetic. Kurt Dinsmark wouldn't
have had fishing rights anyway, he was a younger son. . .

And on the gripping hand, Renner thought, they're talking privileges
instead of duties. How common is that? "We pay the nobles one hell of a
stiff fee for running civilization," he said.

     "I rarely hear it put that way. So?"

     "Oh, I like to keep track of whether they're doing their job. In
fact, it's part of my job, which is nice, because I was doing it anyway.
But what I'm hearing about is privileges."

"Give 'em a break. They're off duty. There was another museum."

     Renner nodded slightly. "Yeah. That one's hearsay, and from Moties
at that. The Moties killed the midshipmen who stumbled onto it. This one
wasn't your ordinary museum. The idea was to help the survivors rebuild
civilization."

     "Heh." Cziller drained his glass. "If I hadn't got stuck trying to
rebuild New Chicago..."

     Renner made sympathetic noises. "Understand you did a pretty good
job, though. Hey, I just had a thought. I'm on duty myself in a couple
of hours, but . . . do you get nostalgic for spaceports? And spacecraft?"

     "Sure. The new port is in the old crater where the Halfway Dome
blew up, and sometimes I go out there just to- What's your thought?"

     Renner put down his fork, fished out his comcard. "Get me Horace Bury."

     He -set the comcard on the table while he finished his meal. It
took a while, but presently the card said, "What is it, Renner?"

     "I had a thought, Excellency."

     "Praise Allah, my training has not been for nothing."

     "We're taking Buckman and Mercer up for dinner tonight. Would you
consider another guest? It's Bruno Cziller, retired as admiral. He was
my captain before he handed me to Blaine. Turned MacArthur over to
Blaine, too. The Earl's first ship. I've been trying to tell Bruno about
Mote Prime, but hey, why not let him listen while you and I and Buckman
reminisce? An appreciative audience can be a good thing."

     Momentary pause. Bury too was rank conscious. "Good. Put him on,
please."

     Renner passed the comcard across. Bruno Cziller said, "Excellency?"

     Admiral, we'd be delighted if you could join us for dinner tonight
aboard Sinbad. The next Viceroy of Trans-Coal Sack wi11 be present.
Jacob Buckman is the astronomer who traveled with us to the Mote. We
became friends on that trip. You'll hear as much about the Mote system
as you can learn outside the Institute."

     'Capital. Thank you, Excellency."

     "Will you be accompanied?"

     "Thank you, no, Excellency. Mrs. Cziller has appointments for the
evening."

     "Admiral, I'm handing you over to the computer to order your
dinner. We'll want a chance to put food stores aboard."

     Cziller's eyebrows went up. Rennet said, "Bury's got a good chef.
Test him out."

     Cziller nodded, and did. Presently he passed the comcard back.
"Kevin, you never used to be subtle."

     "I may have picked up something in a quarter century with Bury.
Mercer will be happier if a higher rank is there. And Bury might tell
you how he spent his time on Mote Prime. He's never told me."

     "Oh?"

     "Moties scare him. He'd rather not remember. It's worth a try.
Besides, I've got to get to the spaceport early to get the shuttle
ready. Why don't-"

     "Why don't I come with you to supervise."

     Right. And now I have another thought,"

     "Expound."

     "A month ago we thought we'd found Moties loose in the Empire."

     Melon arrived, and Kevin talked while they ate. He had Bruno
Cziller chortling. "Now Bury wants to visit the blockade, be sure it's
leak proof. So do I, Bruno. Maxroy's Purchase was scary."

"And?"

     "Rod Blaine has vetoed it. I'd like to give Bury a shot at changing
his mind."

     Bruno Cziller was studying him like a lab specimen, or perhaps like
the man across from him at a poker table. "I'm the man who gave the Earl
his ship and his Sailing Master. I also wished a prisoner on him. Horace
Bury was traveling as a prisoner on MacArthur. Do you know why?"

     "Nope."

     "After twenty-five years?"

     "I might not have liked it. I've got to live with him, Bruno."

           "The question is, why should I get involved?"

     "I haven't thought of that part yet."

     The coffee arrived. "Real cream,' Renner said.

     Cziller smiled faintly. "I'd be glad to get used to basic protocarb
milk if I could go to space again."

     Renner studied his coffee for a moment. "Look, shall I tell Bury
you already turned me down, so you don't have to go through this twice?"

     Bruno said, "Yes." And they moved on to other matters.

 

     "Smooth," Jacob Buckman said.

     Horace Bury looked up in momentary puzzlement, then nodded. The
transition to weightlessness had been quite smooth, but Bury was used to
Renner's skillful management of the shuttle, He felt tiny accelerations,
then the chimes announced they were docked with Sinbad. The connecting
hatchways swung open. A crewman brought a towline from Sinbad into the
shuttle and made it fast. "All correct, Excellency," he said.

     Bury waited a moment to allow Nabil and his assistants to go ahead,
then disconnected himself from his couch. It was good to fly free of the
travel chair. "Welcome," he said. "Does anyone wish assistance?"

     "Thank you, Excellency," Andrew Mercer Calvin said. He unsnapped
his seat belt and allowed himself to drift into the center of the
passenger bay. He grasped the towline and tugged himself toward the ship.

     Bury followed. As he did, the connecting hatchway to the pilot's
compartment opened. Cziller and Renner came out. "My congratulations,
Kevin," Bury said. "Dr. Buckman remarked on the smoothness of our ride."

"Not my doing," Renner said.

     "Guess I haven't lost all my skills," Cziller said smugly.

     In fact there was little for humans to do beyond giving directions
to the computer. Or- Bury wondered. Had Cziller flown by direct control?
Would Renner have let him, given who their passenger was? Yes. Yes, he
would.

     They clung to a score of handholds while Sinbad spun up. Then Bury
led the way into the interior, moving smoothly if not quickly in 60
percent of standard gravity. Aaah.

     "When I was twenty-six years old," he said to nobody in particular,
"the natives of Huy Brasil took exception to some of my policies. They
attacked me in the desert east of Beemble Town. I beat them into town,
doubled through some alleys, and was back in the desert heading for my
shuttle. I outran them all. Sometimes I do miss being young."

     "Amen," Cziller said.

     "I had to outrun an earthquake once," Buckman said. "1 got
downstairs and out of the observatory before it shook down on me. I
think I could still do it. I run every day." He stopped walking. "Roomy.
I knew you were rich, Bury."

     Sinbad's lounge was big. Two recessed rails ran down the center,
chairs and couches on either side. "Please be seated, and consider this
your home," Bury said. "Hazel will take your drink orders."

     Bury tended to employ women of great beauty. It wasn't his first
priority, but it could help a business transaction to run more smoothly.
Mercer was looking at Hazel when he said, "Bury, I like your ship."

     "Thank you. It's roomier than it seems. I can attach a pod the size
of this lounge and open up that entire oval area in the floor, which is
the hull side, of course. The cabins don't become any roomier, but you
don't have to spend all your time in them."

     Mercer laughed. "I'm surprised you bother with hotels."

     "Not always our choice," Renner said. "Customs isn't always as
efficient as they were today."

     "Ah. Hazel, what do you suggest?"

     "We have a good stock of wines, my Lord."

     Mercer smiled broadly. "Just what I've missed on Sparta. Dry sherry?"

     "Me, too," Cziller said. "Kevin, do you always live like this? I
haven't had a decent sherry in five years." He stretched. "Got good legs
on this ship?"

     "Not bad," Renner said. "She's no battle cruiser, but we can pull a
full gee for a long way. The drop tank fits behind the add-on cabin, and
it almost doubles our delta-vee."

     "And of course you won't have a Langston Field generator in

Sparta system," Cziller prompted.

     "The Navy approves licenses for private ownership of Field
generators sometimes," Reriner said. "Outside the Capital. One of Bury's
engineering ships will meet us."

     "As well," Bury said smoothly. "We were running low on Sumatra
Lintong coffee."

     Bury watched Mercer and thought he detected envy. He asked, "Will
you be leaving for New Caledonia soon, my Lord?"

     "There's a Hamilton Lines passenger ship in three weeks," Mercer
said. "Or I can go with the Navy relief squadron next month. Haven't
quite decided."

     Bury nodded in satisfaction.

 

     At point six gee, food stayed on the plates, wine stayed in the
glasses.

     Mercer had had an ulcer in 3037 and a recurrence in 3039. Modern
medicine could make those go away, but nothing could cure a
high-pressure lifestyle. And Bury was old, and so was Buckman. For them
Sinbad's chef had prepared a mild chicken curry.

     Cziller had asked for sea grendel, an air-breathing Spartan
seabeast on the endangered species list. Sea grendels were being raised
in a small bay on Serpens. They were for sale, but the price was high.
Renner got it, too. He didn't have to order. His tastes were known~ he
would eat anything he couldn't pronounce.

     "Good," he said. "Really good. Were they hunted to extinction?"

     Cziller finished chewing and put his fork down with a broad smile.
"Haven't had that since we were invjted'to the Palace. No, it wasn't
overharvesting. The orcas have learned to hunt sea gren. del, but that's
not it either. Mostly, there's a lot of ocean down there and not much
land. The last passing of Menalaus was too close, the ocean got too warm
for them, the West Sea thermal plant was stirring up the water, the fish
they were eating went into a decline, and suddenly sea grendels were
very scarce. Might have been worse but old Baron Chalmondsley got
interested in them. Now the University's on top of the problem. Hey,
Kevin, what did you eat on Mote Prime?"

     "Mostly ship stores, and protocarb milk, but the Moties found us a
few things. There was an interesting melon. We didn't bring anything
back, of course," Renner set his fork down. "Anything. My Lord, we could
have covered Lenin's hull with souvenirs. What would you have brought
back, Bury?"

     I'll put that back in your teeth, Kevin. "I thought of taking Motie
Watchmakers. I thought they would make wonderful pets. That was before
they destroyed His Majesty's battle cruiser MacArthur. After that I
tried to persuade the Admiral to cremate everything."

     "My files say you made a fair profit from the superconductors and
the filters," Mercer said.

     "I would have vaporized them."

     Renner asked, "What would you have brought back, Jacob?"

     "Information," the astronomer said brusquely. "That, the Admiral
didn't prohibit."

     Cziller nodded. "Buckman's Protostar. Kevin, did you get anything
named after you?"

"Nope."

     "What would you have brought back?"

     "Artwork. I wanted the Time Machine sculpture long before we knew
what those demons were. I wanted a certain painting . . . the one my
Fyunch(click) called the Message Bearer. Another thing we should have
noticed. There's a Runner subspecies, and they're still kept around.
When the cycles turn and all the Moties' sophisticated communications
collapse, there are still the Message Bearers."

     "You said information, Dr. Buckman," Mercer said. "I understand the
Moties were not permitted to bring any sophisticated record storage
devices, but surely you collected your own."

     "What I could," Buckman said.

     "Of course the Moties themselves are pretty sophisticated record
storage devices," Renner said.

     "One reason they haven't developed information technology much,"
Buckman said. "Things fall apart so often."

     "More wine, my Lord?" Bury asked, and signaled Hazel to open
another bottle.

     He could have had fresh fruit shipped up; hut Bury wanted to show
off Sinbad's kitchen. Dessert was an array of cakes served with fresh
espresso. Bury watched Mercer with satisfaction. A Navy wardroom offered
nothing like this. The best accommodations on a Hamilton Lines passenger
ship could only rival Sinbad, and the liner made calls on four planets
before reaching New Caledonia.

     "Of course if this young pup Arnoff has his way, it'll be called
Arnoff's Protostar," Buckman said.

     Renner laughed. "What? Hey, it was your discovery. I mean, Jock
might argue they ought to call it Jock's Protostar, but as far as humans
go-"

     Mercer said, "Excuse me? I've studied the Mote expedition records,
but I must have missed that one."

     "Not surprising," Renner said. "Look, from Mote system you get a
good look deep into the Coal Sack. While the rest of us were dealing
with the sudden fact of an intelligent species older than we are, Dr.
Buckman found a curdling in the Coal Sack. He was able to show that it's
a protostar. It's a thickening of the interstellar gas that's about to
collapse under its own weight. A new sun."

     "Jacob, what is this?" Bury asked.

     "Oh, this young idiot believes I got it all wrong, that the
protostar will ignite any day now."

     "But surely you would have known," Bury protested. "You had
MacArthur's instruments for observation."

     "Some of the data were lost when we abandoned ship," Buckman
reminded him. "Only they weren't.'

     One of the reasons Bury liked Buckman was that their interests were
so different. He was a man Bury couldn't use. Bury could relax when
Buckman was around.

     In fact, Bury was paying more attention to Mercer. But he noticed
how Ronner's hands suddenly gripped the table's edge. Renner said, "What?"

     "Some of the observation files were beamed to Lenin," Buckman said.
"There were Watchmakers all through MacArthur then, and the information
came all in one dump. About a year ago they were doing upgrades on Lenin
and the files turned up." Buckman shrugged. "Nothing I thought was new,
but this fellow Arnoff thinks he's got enough for a new theory.'

     Renner said gently, "Jacob, wouldn't you like to live to see it
become a star?"

     Buckman shifted uncomfortably. "Well, I'd look foolish, but it's
impossible anyway. Sometimes it seems unfair. My Fyunch(click) believed
that the fusion burn will begin within the next thousand years. I've
reviewed my observations repeatedly since, and I think he's right. I
came that close

     "A Mediator. Your Fyunch(click) wasn't really an astronomer. Male,
wasn't it? A male would be too young to have had practice at anything."

     "Mediators learn to think like their targets. My Mediator was an
astronomer, Kevin, at least by the time we separated."

     "Uh-huh. Does the Navy know about this Arnoff's theories?"

     Renner asked.

     "I suppose someone in the Bureau of Research watches astrophysics
file updates," Buckman said. "Why the Navy?"

     "Gerbil shit! Doctor, you have got to learn to look outside your
specialty!"

     "Kevin?" Bury demanded.

     "If the protostar ignites, we get new Alderson paths," Renner said.

     "It won't happen," Buckman protested.

     "A moment," Mercer said quietly. "Sir Kevin, could you explain?"

     "I may have to lecture."

     "Please do so."

     "Okay. Ships travel along Alderson tramlines. Tramlines form
between stars, along lines of equipotential flux. I won't explain that,
you got it in high school, but it means they don't form between all
pairs of stars. Not all the tramlines are useful, because if the flux
densities aren't high enough, they won't carry anything big enough to
have a drive aboard.

     "The Mote sits out there with the Coal Sack on one side and the big
red supergiant Murcheson's Eye on the other. The Eye is big and bright.
So bright that the only useful tramline from the Mote is not only to the
Eye, it terminates inside the supergiant. Tough on Moties trying to use
that tramline. The blockade is there to make it even tougher.

     "When Buckman's Protostar ignites, it'll create new tramlines."

     "To where? Who would I ask?"

     "Damned if I know," Rennet said. "Dr. Buckman, maybe. It depends on
the energy levels after ignition."

     "But the Moties could escape." Bury had his diagnostic sleeve on.
It showed him staying remarkably calm, considering. As if he had always
known, always known they would get out.

     "Yeah," Renner said.

     Mercer caught Hazel's eye. "Another of that excellent brandy,
please. Thank you, Bury. There's no better at the Palace. Now. Sir
Kevin, let me get this straight. For a quarter of a century the Empire
has spent billions of crowns to maintain a blockade to contain the
Moties, as an alternative to sending in a battle fleet to exterminate
them. Now you say that if Dr. Buckman's theory is incorrect, that
blockade will be ineffective. Suddenly. Is that a fair statement?"

     "As I always feared," Bury said. Rennet was nodding, teeth bared.

     "Nonsense," Buckman insisted. "That star won't collapse in our
lifetimes, I don't care how good your doctors are!"

     "I find that comforting," Mercer said. "You will understand that as
the new Governor General of the Trans-Coal Sack Sector, I will
automatically become chairman of the commission that sets policy
regarding the Moties? I'd thought the Motie policy fixed and settled.
The political questions regarding New Scotland and New Ireland are more
than enough to renew my ulcers." He sipped at the huge snifter Hazel had
brought him.

     "Jacob." Bury sounded very old. "You once had a different notion
about the protostar."

     Oh, I don't think so."

     "It was long ago, and memories are fallible," Bury said. His hand
strayed to the input ball of his chair, and his fingers played complex
chords with the buttons. The inboard wall of the lounge became translucent.

     Two images formed. Bury and Buckman, both twenty-five years
younger, dressed in shipboard clothing fashionable that long ago.

     "Buckman, you really must eat," Bury's image said. "Nabil! Sandwiches."

     "The Navy people only let me use the telescopes at their
convenience," the younger Buckman said. "Computers, too."

     "Are either available now?"

     "No. Of course you're right. Thank you. Only-Bury, it's so damned
important."

     "Of course it is. Tell me about it."

     'Bury, do I know astrophysics?" Buckman's image didn't wait for a
reply. "Not even Horvath thinks he knows more. But the Moties-Bury,
they've got a lot of new theories. Some new math to go with it. The Eye.
We've been studying the Eye since Jasper Murcheson's time. We've always
known it would explode one day. The Moties know when!"

     Bury's image looked apprehensive. "Not soon, I trust?"

     "They say AD. 2,774,020 on April twenty-seventh."

"Doctor-"

     "Oh, they're trying to be funny, but darnit, Bury, they're a lot
closer than we were, and they can prove that! Then there's the protostar."

     Bury's image raised an eyebrow.

     "There's a protostar out there," Buckman said. "Forming out in the
Coal Sack. I can prove it. It's about ready to collapse."

     The younger Bury smiled politely. "I know you a little, Jacob. What
do you mean by now? Will you have time to eat?"

     "Well, what I meant was sometime in the next half a million years.
But the Moties have been watching it a long time. My- student-how do you
say it?"

     "Fyunch(click)," Bury's younger image said. (Eyes flicked toward
the living Bury. Could a human being have made that sound?)

     "Yeah. He says it'll take a thousand years, plus or minus forty."

     A younger Nabil came on-screen with sandwiches and an old-fashioned
thermos.

     Bury touched his controls and the wall faded out. "You see, Jacob?
You were led to your theory. Left alone, what might you have thought?"

Buckman frowned. "Not the Moties. Their math." "Observation reports,
too," Renner said. "Theirs." "Well, yes . . . yes, of course. But Kevin,
you're "What?"

"You're suggesting my Fyunch(click) lied to me."

     "It never would have crossed my mind," Bury said gently, "that my
Fyunch(click) would not lie to me. Kevin's played jokes on him, of
course. Lady Blaine's certainly lied to her. It's on record."

"Yes." Buckman was not happy. "Then Arnoff's right."

     "Jacob? Come with me aboard Sinbad to Murcheson's Eye. You can get
new data. If you can't destroy this Arnoff's reconstruction, you can
refine it, improve it, until half of civilization thinks it's yours."

     "I'll come," Buckman said quickly.

     "This dithering is a bad habit, Jacob," Renner said.

     "I'm getting tired of reviewing old data anyway."

     "When does Arnoff say is the earliest this-event-could happen?"
Mercer asked.

     "Last month," Buckman said.

 

     Mercer looked puzzled. "Then it could already have happened and we
would not know. I think you said your protostar was light-years from any
observer?"

"Oh," Cziller said. "No, my Lord. It has been known since CoDominium
times that Alderson tramlines form as nearly instantaneously as anything
can be in this universe."

"There's a propagation speed," Buckman said. "We just don't know what it
is. No way to measure it." The astrophysicist looked thoughtful. "All
the really interesting events happen in the last dozen years."

"Now. They could be happening now," Renner said. "You know what this
means? It may be important to have a ship from the Crazy Eddie Squadron
pop into the Mote system long enough to get data on the protostar"

"Allah be merciful," Bury said. He straightened visibly. "Well,my Lord,
I promised you an entertaining dinner."

"You've kept that promise," Mercer said."Now may I offer you more? I
have long intended to go to New Caledonia. I would be more than pleased
to have you as a guest for the journey"

"That's generous," Mercer said. "I'd like to accept."

"But you do not?" Bury asked.

Mercer sighed. "Excellency, I'm a politician. Successful, I think, but
still a politician. I don't know how it happened, but you have made a
very powerful enemy"

"Captain Blaine," Renner said.

"Earl Blaine. Precisely. I need not tell anyone in this room just how
powerful the Blaine family is. As the first members of the Imperial
Commission, they set the policies on our relations with the Moties. The
old Marquis has a standing invitation at the Palace. Frankly, I can't
afford to have their opposition."

"No argument there," Cziller said.

Mercer shrugged. "Excellency, I can see great benefits to having your
friendship, and a comfortable and expeditious journey is probably the
least of them, but what can I do?"

"Let me get something straight," Cziller said. "His Excellency's-uh,
strong distrust-of Moties is well known. My last assignment was in
BuPolDoc-excuse me, the Navy's Bureau of Policy and Doctrines-and Bury,
you had half a dozen expensive Imperial Autonetics PR types trying to
convince everyone in the Navy."

     "I suppose I became something of a joke," Bury said.

     "Not that, Excellency. Hardly that. But maybe we stopped giving
your holos quite as high a priority when they mentioned Moties. Kevin, I
never knew you considered Moties a threat. Your video report sure
doesn't come across that way."

     Renner nodded. "I had a wonderful time on the Mote expedition, and
I guess that's what showed. That report was for the media. I didn't make
it for the Navy. For that matter, I have to calm Bury down sometimes.

     "Even so, at Maxroy's Purchase I was the one who ran around
shrieking, 'The Moties are coming!' I'm not blind. A couple of points,
okay? I love Mediators. Especially my own Fyunch(click), and I suppose
that's just my natural narcissism. We all felt that way. Every so often
I have to remind myself that everyone who thinks he likes Moties
actually likes Motie Mediators. They're the ones who do all the talking.
But the Masters make all the decisions, and they only talk to and
through Mediators. Clear?"

     A point worth noting," Czifler said. "My Lord, did you know that
the Blaine children had Motie nannies when they were growing up? It
wasn't generally publicized."

     Renner said, "Yeah. Second. I like Bury. Tastes differ, but I like
Horace Bury just fine. You didn't know that, did you, Bury?"

     Bury felt his cheeks warming. "You've never said that."

     "Yeah. But he's dangerous. Check his record. The Moties are
likewise dangerous, and I don't mean Mediators now, I mean a dozen
species that think like robber barons and build like idealized engineers
and carry a ton of stuff on their shoulders and do their farming with an
inborn green thumb and fight like God knows what. We've never seen
Warriors fight, but if they're as good at war as Engineers are at
tinkering, yuk."

     "One must not forget their sexual cycle," Bury said.

     "Yeah. If they don't get pregnant, they die horribly. population
problem, or what?"

     Cziller waved that away. "We don't need that lecture. Everybody
knows it. We know how they solve it, too. Wars. It's why we had to lock
them up in the first place. Damn! I suppose it is . . . scary, to think
of Mediators lecturing at Blaine Institute and raising little Blaines.
There was a Master, too, but I hear he died early."

     "The Blaine children. We met young Glenda Ruth. She was grateful
for a present I provided.

     Cziller looked thoughtful. "My Lord, you said you could see
advantages to His Excellency's friendship."

     "Well-"

     Pardon me, my Lord. I wasn't arguing. I can see advantages, too."
Cziller looked grim. "Look, I'm as loyal as anybody, but I'm not blind.
The Empire just isn't as efficient as it was thirty years ago. When the
Moties were first discovered, Merrill was Viceroy out there behind the
Coal Sack. Old Navy man. He had a battle fleet together before Sparta
even knew there was a problem. You couldn't do that now, my Lord."

"No, Admiral, I probably couldn't," Mercer said.

     'You can't even get Sparta to react that fast," Cziller said. "It's
like we've got fat in the arteries. My Lord, if the Moties really are
dangerous, and that damn star really is about to let them out, you're
going to need all the clout you can get. Blaine and Bury together
wouldn't be too much."

     Mercer nodded. "I can't argue, but I can't think what to do,
either. I don't know why the Earl so thoroughly disapproves of Trader Bury."

     "I do," Cziller said. "Damn all, I promised Jennifer I wouldn't get
into this. Excellency, would you ask your computer to help me place a
call? Blaine Manor."

     "You can get through?" Renner asked.

     "Once. I can't abuse the privilege or they'll change the codes on
me." He turned to Bury. "Excellency, I think it's about time you and Rod
Blaine had a talk about New Chicago."

     Ice ran up Bury's spine, and he saw his indicators jump.

 

 

6 The Seeds of Treason

 

 

Each man must for himself alone decide what is right and what is wrong,
which course is patriotic and which isn't. You cannot shirk this and be
a man.

 

-Mark Twain

 

 

The informal luncheon room of the Drakenberg Club was paneled in walnut,
then decorated with a theme Renner didn't recognize: pictures of men in
strange uniforms, carrying odd implements that included oversize gloves
for one hand, and a small white ball.

     The club steward ushered him to a table. Glenda Ruth Blaine was
already there. The steward bowed formally. "My Lady, your guest."

     "Thank you, William,'' she said. William, this is my brother's
godfather, Sir Kevin Renner."

     "Ah. Pleased to meet you, Sir Kevin. Shall I send the waiter, my Lady?"

     "Please." Glenda Ruth waited until the steward was gone, then
flashed a hefty grin. Made his day, we did. William does love rubbing
elbows with the aristocracy."

     Kevin Renner sat. He couldn't help thinking what a remarkably
pretty girl Glenda Ruth was. Not beautiful in the fashion-magazine
sense, something else, something about her infectious smile. Of course
she was only seventeen standard years old, but she seemed older.
Influence of the Moties? Her mother hadn't been a lot older, no more
than twenty-five, when she'd gone to the Mote world. Renner tried to
remember what Sally Fowler had been like. He indicated the half dozen
forks at his place. Bit fancy for lunch?"

Glenda Ruth winked at him. "Stuffy place, but it was the only one I
could think of where you can't possibly grab the check."

"Is that important?"

Her smiled faded slightly. "It might be. Daddy doesn't want us accepting
favors from Horace Bury. We're guessing you have an expense account."

"I do, but this isn't business. Or is it?"

She shrugged. "It might be. I took Admiral Cziller's call. After he
talked to Daddy. I called him back."

"Yeah, I suppose you would know him."

"You could say that." She chuckled. "I called him Uncle Bruno until I
was ten- Here's the waiter. Champagne cocktail for me.Kevin?"

"Bit early for drinking. Coffee, please"

"Yes, sir"

Glenda Ruth was grinning at him again. 'You don't need to be so adult."

"Eh?"

"They know how old I am. My champagne cocktail won't have alcohol in it.
Of course some kids just slip in vodka from a flask."

"Will you?"

"I don't even own a flask."

"Motie influence?"

"No, none of them ever mentioned it."

Hmm? But she didn't drink. But- "Yeah. They wouldn't see the point. They
eat, drink, breathe industrial poison. If you aren't tough enough, you
die. Why go looking for more?"

She nodded. "That sounds right."

Kevin looked around the room. Typical aristocratic luncheon place.
Expensive women and very busy men. He didn't really notice them. He
looked away from the table so he wouldn't look as if he were staring at
the girl he was with, and the truth was that he very much wanted to
stare at her. She was far and away the most attractive woman in the
room. Probably the most expensive, too, Kevin thought. Her clothes were
simple enough, a dark wool afternoon dress that fit perfectly,
emphasizing her femininity without being overtly sexy. The skirt was
just knee length, slightly conservative by current fashions, but that
tended to emphasize the calves and ankles. Her jewelry was simple, but
included a matched pair of earrings of Xanadu firestones worth enough to
buy a house on Renner's home planet.

     "Quite a long way from Maxroy's Purchase," Renner said.

     "Or from New Caledonia."

     "True. How long were you there?"

     "I barely remember it," Glenda Ruth said. "Dad thought Kevin
Christian and I ought to grow up on Sparta instead of in the provinces."
She shrugged. "I suppose he was right, but-I worry about the Moties, now
that Mother and Dad aren't on the Commission."

     "They're not on the Commission, but they still have plenty of
influence," Renner said. "As Bury and I found out."

     "Yeah. Sorry about that."

     "So. What did you want to see me about?" Renner asked.

     "Crazy Eddie."

     "Uh?"

     "You said back at the Institute that we don't understand Crazy
Eddie. He's supposed to fail?"

     "Yes, I guess I said that."

     "I've only known three Moties," she said. "I think I understand
Crazy Eddie, but I'm not sure. You knew a lot of Moties-"

"Not for long. Not very well."

     "Well enough to understand Crazy Eddie."

     "Not understand, exactly

     "You know what I mean. There were a dozen stories about Crazy
Eddie. Most were recorded, and I have them. There was the story they
told you, for instance." She took out her pocket computer and scribbled
on it for a moment. An image rose out of the tablecloth.

     Rennet had taken this sequence straight from MacArthur's records as
beamed to Lenin. A twisted shape in brown-and-white fur, a Motie
Mediator, was speaking. "Renner, I must tell you of a creature of legend.

     "We will call him Crazy Eddie, if you like. He is a . . . he is
like me, sometimes, and he is a Brown, an idiot savant tinker,
sometimes. Always he does the wrong things for excellent reasons. He
does the same things over and over, and they always bring disaster, and
he never learns."

     The image jumped a bit. Renner had edited this for Summer Vacation.
"When a city has grown so overlarge that it is in immediate danger of
collapse . . . when food and clean water flow into the city at a rate
just sufficient to feed every mouth, and every hand must work constantly
to keep it that way . . . when all transportation is involved in moving
vital supplies, and none is left over to move people out of the city
should the need arise . . . then it is that Crazy Eddie leads the movers
of garbage out on strike for better working conditions."

     Glenda Ruth turned it off. Rennet said, "I remember. My
introduction to Crazy Eddie. Once we knew what to ask for, we got more.
Jock Sinclair's Motie spoke of melting down your supply of screws to
make a screwdriver. Father Hardy's Mediator talked about a religion that
preached abstention from sex. We didn't know how bizarre that was, for
Moties."

     "Yes, but you know, we never did learn much more about it," Glenda
Ruth said. "So why did you say that Crazy Eddie is supposed to fail?
Don't the Moties admire Crazy Eddie? Jock certainly does."

     "You'd know more than me. But yes, I think they all admire anyone
mad enough to think all problems have solutions. Which doesn't mean that
they expect the universe to cooperate."

     "No, of course not. But I still wonder,"

     "The Cycles," Renner said. "It's all they have for history. Crazy
Eddie thinks he can change all that. End the Cycles. Of course they
admire him. They also know he's crazy, and it won't happen."

     "But maybe we have the solution now. The parasite."

     "Yeah, I've wondered about that," Renner said. The waiter brought
coffee, and a tall champagne glass with something sparkling and pink for
Glenda Ruth. Kevin ordered absently, his mind far from food.

     "You knew two Mediators," Rennet said. "Of course you didn't get to
know Ivan."

     "No. He was-more aloof. Masters are."

     "And the Mediators speak for them," Renner said. "That's more
obvious on the Mote than it would have been to you. But it's something
you don't dare forget. Take your parasite. Jock can't make any deal
that's binding on Masters back on the Mote."

     "Yes-"

     "There's also the question of how your parasite would get to the
Mote. I doubt the Navy will let any ships go there."

     I talked to Uncle Bruno this morning," Glenda Ruth said.

     "Eh?"

     "The protostar. When it ignites, the Moties will come out. We have
to do something before that happens. I'm sure Admiral Cziller is talking
to all his classmates right now."

     "Will something happen Soon?"

     "Of course not. Sparta isn't like that. It will have to be
discussed in the Navy, then at the Palace, then the politicians will get
in the act."

     "Fortunately it may not collapse soon. Or does Jock know something?"

     She shook her head. "He doesn't know, and he wouldn't have known.
Ivan may have known things we weren't supposed to find out, but Jock and
Charlie never did. And Ivan was no astronomer. He wouldn't be. Keepers
aren't usually curious." The waiter brought lunch. Glenda Ruth talked
all during lunch, drawing Renner out, until he realized he had told her
nearly everything he'd ever thought about the Mote.

     She's a damned good listener. Cares what you say. Of course she
would-it's hard to tell what's an act and what isn't. Maybe none of it is.

     She waited until dessert before she said, "Bruno said he wished he
could go with you. To the Mote."

     "We're not going to the Mote. Just to the Crazy Eddie
Squadron-maybe not there, if your father doesn't lift his veto. You know
he's blocking the trip. Can you talk to him?"

     "I can talk. It won't help. They don't much listen to me. But I'll
try-if I get Daddy to say yes, can I go with you?"

     Rennet managed to set the coffee cup down without spilling any.

 

 

     Glenda Ruth looked defiantly at her mother. "Aaall right. You won't
let Kevin and Horace Bury go. Fine, I won't go with them. I'll go with
Freddy."

"Freddy!"

     Certainly. He has a ship."

     "Pretty good one, too," Rod Blaine said. Sally's look silenced him
before he could say anything else.

     "You are not going halfway across the galaxy with that-" Glenda
Ruth cocked her head. "Freddy? You can hardly complain about his social
standing. His family is as prominent as ours. About as rich, too. We
went out beyond the moon for a week during Spring vacation. You didn't
search wildly for an appropriate insult then."

     "Did-" Sally caught herself. "It's a bit different, being in a
small ship for months.'

     "If it's my reputation that worries you, we can take a chaperone.
Or one of my friends from the Institute. Jennifer. And her mother."

     "That's absurd. Jennifer can't afford that.'

     "I can, Mother. I'll be eighteen in two weeks, and I'll have my own
money. Uncle Ben left me quite a lot, you know."

     Rod and Sally exchanged looks.

     "What does Freddy's father have to say about this?" Sally demanded.

     "For that matter, have you asked Freddy?" Rod asked. "I know you
haven't asked Bury."

     "She doesn't think she has to ask anyone," Sally said. Glenda Ruth
laughed. "Freddy will be glad to take me anywhere, and you know it. And
his father doesn't care what he does, if he won't join the Navy'

     "Which he won't," Rod said.

     "Because he knows he wouldn't be any good at it," Glenda Ruth said.

Sally shook her head. "I don't see what you see in Freddy Townsend-"

"You wouldn't, Mother. He's not a hero like you. Or Daddy. But I like
him. He's funny. And Jock likes him."

     "You must like him a lot if you're willing to be cooped up in that
yacht of his for several months," Rod said. "And I don't think you would
for a trip to Saint Ekaterina. Widget-"

     "Please don't call me that."

     "Sorry, Princess.

     "Go ahead and wriggle, my Lord, but you'll have to think of me as
an adult soon or sooner. Two weeks to practice, My Lord Blaine

     Blaine recovered fast, but for an instant he'd been jolted. Then,
"Glenda Ruth, I know why Bury wants to go to New Caledonia. He wants to
inspect the Blockade Fleet. But why you? Freddy's ship can't go to the
blockade point! It's inside a star, and last time I looked there wasn't
any Langston Field on that yacht."

     "I want to see my brother. I don't have to visit the Blockade Fleet
for that. He gets to New Cal twice a year

     Sally snorted. "Brother. What you want to do is go to the Mote."

     "Chris would, too," Rod said. "But neither of you is going to do it.'

     "She's persuasive," Sally said. "And so is Chris. Together-"

     "Separately or together our children aren't going to talk the Navy
into that," Rod said. "Prin-Glenda Ruth, this is silly. You're upsetting
your mother. You are not going to New Caledonia."

     "I am, yes. I don't want to start a big fight, but really, how can
you stop me? In two weeks I'll have my own money." She grinned. "Of
course I could marry Freddy.

     Sally looked horrified, then laughed. "Serve you right if you did."

     "Anyway, I don't have to."

"You've already been accepted at the University," Sally said. "Yes, and
I'll go, but not just now." Glenda Ruth shrugged. "Lots kids take a
wanderjahre before starting college. Why not me?" "All right. Let's be
serious," Rod said. "Why?"

Glenda Ruth said, "I'm worried about the Moties."

     "Why should you be worried about the Moties?" Sally asked.
"Politics. Growing up in this house, I've seen a lot of politics go past
my nose. When the Parliament starts debating the cost of the Blockade
Fleet, anything can happen. Anything! Suppose they think it costs too
much? They aren't going to just pull the fleet back to New Cal. You know
they won't. They'll-" She caught herself.

     "They'll what?" Sally asked.

     Her voice was no more than a whisper. "They'll send for Kutuzov.'

     Sally frowned and looked to Rod.

     He shrugged. "The Admiral retired long ago. He's pretty old as
Bury, I guess. Last I heard he was still active in Saint ma politics,
but he doesn't come here."

     "He's organized Mankind First," Glenda Ruth said

     Rod frowned. "I hadn't heard he was behind that group. How sure is
this?"

     "Freddy told me, but I had a chance to back it up. Sir Radford
Bowles spoke for Mankind First at a University of Sparta symposium.
Freddy took me. I got in an argument with him at the tea afterward. I
watched him. He's picked up some of Admiral Kutuzov's mannerisms."

     Rod shook his head, smiling. "I tore the first Motie probe apart so
the Humanity League wanted my hide. Now this Mankind First outfit wants
to use Blaine Institute research to wipe out the Moties! I can't win."

     "It's not you who can't win," Glenda Ruth said. "It's the Moties
who'll lose. And there's no reason."

     "There aren't any Moties," Rod said.

     "Dad-"

     "Not the way you say it. There are plenty of Moties, all right. A
planet full of them. More in their Trojan Point clusters and the moons
of the gas giant. But there's no single Motie civilization, Glenda Ruth.
Never was, never will be. Every Master is independent."

     "I know that."

     "Sometimes I wonder if you do."

     'Dad, I know more about Moties than you do! I've read everything,
including your debriefings, and I grew up with Moties."

     "Yes. You had the Motie Mediators as friends and companions.
Sometimes I wonder if that was such a good idea," Rod said. "Your mother
didn't like it much."

     "I went along," Sally said. "Glenda Ruth, you think you know as
much about Moties as we do. Maybe you're right. Maybe you aren't,
though. You've only known three of them. Only two at all well. And you
want to gamble with the lives of the whole human race-"

     "Oh, Mother, stop that. How am I gambling with anything? I can't
even get to Mote Prime. Dad knows that."

     Rod nodded. "Pretty hard to do. The Blockade Fleet's there as much
to keep the Imperial Traders out as to keep the Moties in. You sure
won't get to the Mote in Freddy Townsend's yacht."

     "Then I can go to New Caledonia?"

     "I thought you weren't leaving us any choice."

     "Dad, Mom, I'd rather have your blessing."

     Rod Blaine asked, "Why?"

     "If all else failed, I could come running to you for help.
Something could go wrong. I'm not crazy enough to think it couldn't."

     "Rod-Rod, is that ship safe?" Sally asked.

     Glenda Ruth grinned.

 

 

     The limousine landed on the roof of the Blaine Institute. Three
security guards politely helped Bury into his travel chair and escorted
him to the elevators. There was no receptionist. As Bury entered the
elevator, a guard took out badges and handed them to him and Renner.

     So. Formally correct. Bury wished that Admiral Cziller had come to
the meeting. Cziller understood. Bury wasn't sure why, but it was clear.
And both Blaine and Renner respected him.

     The elevator door opened. Two more uniformed guards ushered them
down the hail to the Blaine office suite. There was no one else in the
corridor

     The guards opened the doors without knocking.

     Both Blaines were present. Bury felt relief. This is an impossible
task, but it would be doubly so without her. Whatever I can say to him
she can veto. Only Allah can persuade those who will not listen, and He
doesn't do that.

     Lady Blaine was pouring coffee. She had not spoken to Bury or
Renner, and there was no shaking of hands.

     The Blaines wore kimono-like garments in strong contrast to the
formal tunics Bury and Renner were wearing. Bury had seen clothing
similar to those kimonos in the streets of Sparta, and even in
restaurants. They were acceptable for receiving guests, but they were
neither friendly nor formal.

     Bury had never seen Roderick Blaine in short sleeves, Smooth,
hairless scar tissue ran from the knuckles up his left arm into the
sleeve; and when Bury understood why, he knew he had lost.

     He accepted coffee. It was excellent . . . it was Jamaica Blue
Mountain. Bury held the cup before his face for an extra moment, to
gather himself. "Very good. Sumatra, perhaps, mixed with local black?"

     The Blue Mountain's entire coffee crop had been reserved for
Sparta, the Palace and the nobles, for half a thousand years. Bury
recognized it-but he wasn't supposed to.

     The Earl said, "Kevin, I take it you're with him."

     Rennet nodded. "Yes, Captain. I came with him. I want to see the
blockade fleet in action. I want to know if they're ready for something
totally off the wall. Captain, we did some talking last night, and
things came out. Have you spent any amount of time talking to Jacob
Buckman, the astronomer?"

     "No, of course not. Who would?"

"I would," Bury murmured.

"Forgive me, your Excellency."

     Renner laughed. "Two green monkeys. What kind of company could
either of them find aboard a working battleship?"

     Bury glared. Renner continued, "None of us knew why Bury was
aboard. I suppose Jack Cargill did, but all you said to us was that His
Excellency was a guest, and he was not to leave the ship. I never quite
knew-"

     Blaine said, "All right. Did Buckman say anything worthy of note?"

     "We thought so," Renner said. "Some old data on Buckman's Protostar
surfaced from Lenin. Do you remember the curdle in the Coal Sack, twenty
light-years in and a light-year across?"

     Sally Blaine looked puzzled. Lord Blaine nodded without enthusiasm.

     Get to the point, Bury wanted to shout, but he sat tight-lipped. He
had agreed to let Renner begin the conversation.

     "It's a protostar, an unborn star," Renner said. "Buckman's Motie
said it'd ignite around a thousand years from now. Buckman confirmed
that. Now there's a young guy who thinks he can prove that it'll happen
much sooner, and he's using observations from MacArthur"

     "So? It'll still be Buckman's Protostar."

"It'll be a T Tauri star, Captain. Very bright. The second question is
when. The gripping hand is, is the blockade fleet ready to deal with
several new Jump points?"

     Blaine's lips moved silently. New Jump points- "God's teeth."

The coffee trembled in Sally Blaine's hand. "Kevin Christian-"

"Yeah," Blaine said. "All right, I owe Cziller an apology. How valid is
this?"

     Bury said, "My Lord, it was a very late night. I summoned up this
Arnoff's work and went over it with Jacob at my shoulder. He pointed out
equations and compared them to his own. I understood nothing, but I know
this. They use the same observational data, but Jacob used additional
data, older data, which he took from Motie astronomers."

     "That could have been faked." Blaine sat at his desk. "Which would
mean they were ready for us from the first moments they saw us. They saw
how the protostar could be used. Before we did."

     "They knew about the Alderson Drive," Renner said. "They call it
the Crazy Eddie Drive. It makes ships vanish. But they already knew how
to build it, and they won't have forgotten."

     "Cycles," Sally Blaine said. "They play on them. Use them. We can
ask Jock- "We will," Blaine said. "But we know what answer we'll get.
Buckman was given doctored data."

     Bury shrugged. "Moties lie to their Fyunch(click)s. Who should know
that better than we?'

     Sally nodded grimly. "They don't like it-" and she saw Bury's
flicker of a smile

     Rod Blaine finished his coffee before he spoke again. "All right,
Kevin. You've made your point. A good one. The government has to do
something about this. I'll call the Palace as soon as we're done here.
That still doesn't tell me why you. Why Bury. Why Sinbad'

     "A piece at a time," Renner said. "Okay? First, you have to send
Buckman. We need new observations, and someone to interpret them."

     No interruption came. He said, "Second, New Cal system has to be
ready. However the Moties get out-and this includes anything they might
try, Captain, protostar or no protostar-they'll have to come through New
Caledonia. That's where the crucial Jump point leads, as far as I can
tell from a first cut.

     "We met Mercer, the new Governor General. Had him aboard Sinbad
last night. He's a politico, Captain. Sharp, but still a politico. Not a
Navy man. He's got the sense to listen, but you still have to talk slow
and repeat yourself and use simple words. He has to have things
explained to him."

     "So?"

     "We'd have time to work on him if he rides with us to New Cal. Once
we get there, there's a certain large-mouthed reporter named Mei-Ling
Trujillo who's doing her best to cut the funding for the Crazy Eddie
Fleet. The noise she's stirred up, Cunningham already wants to send her
to the Fleet. She's got the clout, she might find something she likes,
and at least it would shut her up for a while.

     "Fourth, there's Bury. If you haven't seen the record, I can tell
you. He's been one hell of an effective agent for the Empire. More than
me. Now one of your best agents sees a threat to the Empire and wants to
investigate. So do I."

     "I see." Blaine looked at Bury. His expression was anything but
friendly. "It seems we made a good decision about you, all those years ago."

     "As it happens, my Lord."

     "I still don't trust you

     "Do you trust me, Captain?" Renner demanded.

     "Eh?"

     "And while we're on the subject, trust who to do what?"

     "Sure I trust you," Blaine said. "You think the whole Spartan
nobility is working for you. Okay, I don't mind being supervised. Maybe
it makes the Empire stronger. But-Excellency, I'm not sure you want the
Empire stronger."

     Bury said, "If twenty-eight years of service-" and ran out of
words. If twenty-eight years of holding back the darkness wasn't
sufficient, then . . . there was nothing to be said.

     "You see?" Blaine was trying to be reasonable. "We don't have to
send Buckman, Kevin, in case you've arranged things so he'll only go
with Bury"

     "No, Captain, it's just that way. He's-'

     "We can send Arnoff. Or a host of others. Kevin, I have good reason
not to trust Bury, and damned little reason why I should."

     Rennet's voice rose. "Captain, for twenty-eight damn years we've
been out working for the Empire- "Kevin, you can't possibly convince me
you haven't enjoyed it," Sally said.

     "Well, all right, so I did." Rennet sipped his coffee. "Captain,
let's talk about your arm for a minute.

     Blaine took a count of three. Then, "Why in blazes would you want
to talk about my arm?"

     "Well, you're wearing short sleeves, for one thing. And I now
recall that when you came back aboard MacArthur at New Chicago, you were
wearing a big padded cast. How'd you get those scars? Did it have
anything to do with the revolt?"

     Blaine said, "Why don't you stick to the subject, Renner?"

     Bury was wishing the same thing with all his heart. It was
hopeless. Bury hadn't tried to shut Renner up in a very long time.

     Renner said, "Nobody wears short sleeves to meet someone he doesn't
like. I think your scars may have something to do with your attitude
here. Was it a burn-through? You don't get those anymore

     "Yeah. New Chicago. The Langston Field took a torpedo, got a hot
spot, burned right through the hull. The flame fused my arm to the
sleeve of my pressure suit."

     "And now they're plating all the Navy ships with Motie superconductor."

     "Ye-ess. You understand, it doesn't mean we don't get killed
anymore. We don't get hurt. Burn-through in the Langston Field, the
whole hull warms up. Till it gets too hot. Then it isn't a
superconductor anymore, and everyone fries.'

     "And the sleeves?"

     The Earl was rubbing the bridge of his nose. It hid his expression,
a bit. "I . . . suppose I was being belligerent. I wasn't going to
mention it myself, but I was damned if I'd let His Excellency forget.
Petty of me. Kevin, I wouldn't let an old grudge get in the way of
Imperial goals. I thought you knew. Bury was a prisoner on MacArthur. He
was suspected of instigating the New Chicago revolt.'

     "And you were in one of the prison camps," Renner said to Sally Blaine.

     "And a friend came with me, and she never went home," she said. Her
eyes narrowed. "And he's guilty as hell. He pushed a   whole world into
revolt just to bloat his already bloated fortune!"

     "Um," said Renner, "no."

     "We had the proof," the Earl said. "We showed it to him. Weused it
to make him work for us- What?"

     Lady Blaine had put her hand on her husband's scarred wrist. She
said, "Kevin. What do you mean, no?"

     "I've known him more than twenty-five years. Bury breaks rules for
enough money, but there wasn't enough money. There couldn't have been.
New Chicago isn't rich. Never was, was it?"

     "Well, it was once . . . come to think of it-"

     "Captain, we've stopped revolts. You know what causes revolts? Bury
knows. Crop failure! It's an old tradition: when the crops fail, the
people depose the king. Trust me, if New Chicago was ready for a revolt,
then it probably wasn't worth robbing, not to the likes of Horace Bury."

     Blaine said, "All right, Bury. Why? We never asked."

     "I wouldn't have answered. Why should I testify against myself?"
Blaine shrugged.

     "You will listen?" Bury demanded.

     Blaine looked at him quickly. "Yes, Excellency."

     Bury spared a glance for his diagnostics. He'd set them high; he
didn't want to be too calm. Nothing had triggered. Good.

     "Thirty-five years, my Lord. You would have been twelve when I
entered New Chicago politics. Of course I was not acting for myself."

     "For whom, then?" Sally demanded.

     "For Levant, my Lady. And all the other Arabs that Levant represents."

     "You were ALO?" Blaine asked.

     "My Lord, I was the Deputy Chairman of the Arabic Liberation
Organization."

     "I see," Blaine said carefully.

     "So my life was forfeit in any event," Bury said. "If you had found
out." He shrugged. "ALO membership was covered under the amnesty, in
case you're wondering."

     "I'm sure," Blaine said. "But what in the devil was the ALO doing
on New Chicago? It wasn't an Arab planet.'

     "No," Bury said. "But it had once been a source of ships. I take it
you know little of New Chicago's history"

     "Almost none," Blaine admitted. "I was only there to fight, and
Lady Blaine has painful memories."

     Bury nodded. So, let me tell you a tale, my Lord. New Chicago was
settled late, well after the formation of the First Empire. It was far
away beyond the Coal Sack, an insignificant world, settled by North
American transportees but administratively part of the Russian sphere of
influence. That is significant because the Russians favored a planned
economy and what they planned for New Chicago was that it would be a
source of ships for the future expansion of the Empire."

     "Figures," Renner said. "Edge of the frontier

     "What's your point?" Sally Blaine demanded

     "A source of ships," Bury continued carefully. "The people of the
First Empire were largely transportees. Not trained astronauts.
Spacesuit and habitat technology had not moved as fast as spacecraft
technology using Alderson Drive and Langston Field. Metals on New
Chicago are easily available. Foundries could be built. The settlers had
decent gravity and reasonably Earthlike conditions. The regions of
exposed ores are east of the good farming land, and there's a dependable
east wind to carry away the industrial stenches. My Lord, nobody knows
more than I do about New Chicago."

     "Local asteroid belts."

     "Yes, exactly. Spacesuits and habitats were improved. The sons of
transportees were trained as astronauts. Of course the next generations
began mining their own local asteroid belts. New Chicago had built their
foundries and shipyards and taught their people the skills, but
meanwhile all the settled solar Systems were building their spacecraft
in the asteroids. New Chicago was geared for a boom that would never come.

     "Then the First Empire came apart. New Chicago did very well out of
the Secession Wars."

     "Oh," Lord Blaine said.

     "Do you see it? New Chicago's boom period came during the first
crisis. That was when my grandfather made his first contact with the
place. He was one of the founders of the ALO."

     "I still don't get it," Sally said. "What did the ALO want from New
Chicago?"

"Ships."

"Why?"

     "Everyone needs ships. Certainly Levant and the other Arab worlds
did. Then, later, when the Second Empire was proclaimed, there was
another reason. New Chicago was new to the Empire. Here was a source of
ships that were never in any Imperial registry.

     Lord Blaine looked puzzled

     "Untraceable?" Sally asked.

     Bury nodded. "An Outie world geared to make spacecraft, desperate
for custom."

     Sally looked up at the ceiling. "Fyunch(click)."

"Ready"

     "In what class was Levant admitted to the Empire?"

     "First. Full self-governing, with interstellar capability"

     "With New Chicago ships?" Blaine asked.

     Bury shrugged. "Any planet when the life support fails."

     "But that was long before the revolt," Blaine said.

     "Certainly, my Lord. That was in my father's time. Now think back
thirty-five years. Today you see the Empire as successful. I invite you
to see it as we did then."

     "Which was how?" Rod Blaine said. He saw that Sally was nodding to
herself.

     Lady Sally was trained in anthropology. Can that be useful? "My
Lord. Your Second Empire was only beginning. It had proclaimed itself
Christian, and if you do not recall the history of the Crusades, I
assure you that we Arabs remember! You had already incorporated Dyan
into the Empire, and promoted Jews to high positions in your military
and navy. Why in the Name of Allah the Merciful should any of us have
trusted you?"

     "Calm down," Renner said.

     Bury glanced at the glowing graphs. "I'm fine. So, my Lord, at last
you know. Yes, I helped instigate the New Chicago revolt and to you it
must have been from the blackest of motives. That would have been an
Outie world, with an economy based on building spacecraft and a thirst
for customers. Unregistered ships, in case Levant should need them. In
case the negotiations with the Empire failed, or in case the Empire
collapsed under its own vaulting ambitions. Empire of Man, indeed! We
might well have been forced once again to proclaim jihad with no armies
and no navies and nothing but the courage of our young men for weapons."

     "And now?" Blaine asked

     Bury shrugged. "The Empire has been successful. You do not like us.
Socially we are second class, but legally we have the rights you
promised. Our planets are self-governing, under people of our own
religion. The threat is now from the Mote, not from Sparta. There is no
more need for the Arab Liberation Organization, and for the past dozen
years I have presided over its liquidation."

     "You're the Chairman, Horace?" Renner demanded.

     "Not in name."

     "Sure. You're not the formal president of the Imperial Traders
Association, either. Holy catfish."

     "Kevin, we presided over the liquidation of Nassari's group. He
would not give up his ambition. I caused-"

     "You made me dig up data on him and turn him in to the Imperials.
Sure. You couldn't hardly tell them, 'Nassari isn't taking my orders
anymore,' now could you?"

     "I did what I had to do, Kevin." Bury turned to Blaine. "You see?
We had a way to get unknown spacecraft for ourselves. New Chicago no
longer has a place for such schemes, but another world might, or an
asteroid belt, or an Oort cloud near an old supernova. If men want
spacecraft, or if Moties want spacecraft of human manufacture, then-then
you must have Horace Bury, the spy."

     Into an uncomfortable silence Earl Blaine asked, "Your Excellency,
just what are your plans, specifically?"

     "Plans or ambitions?" Bury demanded.

 

     "I don't know enough to have specific plans. But already I have
found out more about the Motie threat than Mercer knew. Or you, my Lord.
I have abilities, I have money, and among Allah and my doctors and this
chair I have energy. I propose to employ them all in the Imperial service."

     And he waited.

     "I'll withdraw my objections," Blaine said, ignoring a small sound
of protest from Lady Blaine. "That's all I'll do, but I expect it will
get you to the blockade fleet. God knows what you expect to accomplish
there. Don't waste any more time than you have to."

     "Thank you, my Lord," Bury said.

 

 

     Sally waited for the door to close. Then she demanded, "Why?"

     "You heard it all."

     "But Rod, what's changed? The revolt on New Chicago, the bloodbath,
the prison camps, he caused it all! He raped a world and he killed Dorothy!"

     "I might have done the same in the service of the Empire. I might
have been in Lenin's crew when Kutuzov burned lstvan down to bedrock.
Bury's not just an opportunistic bandit anymore. He was defending his
homeland."

"Levant."

     "Mmm? But it's his world. The key is loyalty. He was an enemy; now
he's an ally. He's protecting the Empire to protect Levant. The enemy of
my enemy is my friend. He sees the Empire as friends, the only hope
against the Moties

     "He could be turned again."

     "Hah! Yes. We set Renner to watch him, and Renner's been doing that
for a quarter century. Maybe there's something that could turn Bury's
loyalty. But not at the blockade. He won't accomplish anything there,
barring a pep talk and some politics, but he won't do any damage. The
blockade stands between Levant and the Moties."

     "If Bury could see Moties as we do . . . Rod? How do you see Moties?"

     Rod didn't answer

     "They destroyed your ship, and you'll never forget. I think you
loved MacArthur more than you have ever loved me. But we've found the
solution!"

     "Have we? It works on Mediators. We don't know about Masters. We
don't know if Masters would accept it even if it does work. They'd call
it a Crazy Eddie answer."

     "It will. It has to."

     "Sally, we depended on the blockade. A few years from now we might
not have a blockade . . . or a hundred years, maybe, or one. And you
know how long it will take Sparta to decide to do something. Renner and
Bury-"

     She nodded slowly. "Action, not talk." She looked at the ceiling.
"Fyunch(click)."

     "Ready"

     "General instructions, all department heads. List essential
equipment and personnel for transfer of the Institute to New Caledonia."

     "Acknowledged."

 

 

Part 3

 

THE MOAT AROUND MURCHESON'S EYE

 

*

To the question, what shall we do to be saved in this World? there is no
other answer but this, Look to your Moat.

 

-George Sevile, Marquis of Halifax

 

 

 

1 New Ireland

The foolish will now ask and say:

"What has made the faithful turn away from the qiblah toward which they
used to pray?" Say:     "To God belong the East and the West.

He guides who so wills to the path that is straight."

 

-al-Qur'an

 

 

     Hyperspace links only specific points. The time required to travel
from one Alderson point to another is immeasurably short; but once that
Jump has been made, the ship must proceed through normal space to the
next Alderson point. This can take weeks to months depending on the
Alderson geometry, ship speed, and logistics.

     Sinbad was faster than most passenger liners, and Bury had arranged
to be met by other ships of his fleet carrying supplies and fuel, so
that Sinbad could go by the most direct route possible; and even so the
trip lasted long enough to put everyone on edge. They remained polite;
but everyone was glad that Sinbad's size allowed some privacy

     Yet Renner observed that the odd friendship between Bury and
Buckman remained as strong as ever; and if the new Viceroy was tiring of
being told stories of Imperial trade on the one hand, and the follies of
Imperial science policy on the other, he showed no signs of it. Renner
had long since taken to excusing himself quickly after the evening
formal dinner

     He was glad to be able to announce the last Jump. "It'll be
aboutmidnight ship's time," he said. "Take your sleeping pills and you
may sleep through it."

     "I wish I could," Ruth Cohen said. "And I don't think I'll ever get
used to Jump shock."

     'You can sleep through it, but you won't get used to it," Renner
said. "It's not something you can get used to. Anyway, this is the last
for a while."

     "One of my ships should be waiting," Bury said,

     Renner nodded. "Yes, sir. They'll have been waiting awhile. We had
a message saying it passed through three weeks ago."

     Bury grimaced. "A costly rendezvous. Ah, well. Thank you, Kevin."

 

     A thin, reedy voice rang through the ship, first in Arabic, then in
Anglic. "Prayer is better than sleep! Come to prayer! I witness that the
Lord our God is One God. I bear witness that there is no God but Allah,
and Mohammed is the Prophet of Allah. Come to prayer. God is great!
Prayer is better than sleep!"

     Ruth Cohen sat bolt upright. "What in the world . . ."

     The ship was in free-fall. The Velcro covers had held her snugly in
the bed, and she'd got so used to gravity changes in the past few weeks
that taking the spin off the ship hadn't awakened her. Must have been
done smoothly. She realized she was alone in the bed. And I really did
sleep through the Jump, too.

     Kevin Renner floated in from the adjoining cabin as the thin
singsong finally ceased.

"Shh."

"But-"

     "Horace has visitors. Partners, or relatives, both maybe, from
Levant on the supply ship. Bury has Nabil play muezzin when he wants to
look like a conventional Moslem. Sorry I couldn't warn you, we only
found out when we docked ships, and I was busy then."

"But-"

     Renner grinned. "They wouldn't appreciate that Sinbad's pilot
sleeps with a concubine."

     "I am not-"

     "Well, I know that, and you know that, but they won't know that.
Anyway, I take it back. They won't be shocked that I have a concubine.
They might not be thrilled by your name."

     "Name."

     "You're from Dyan."

     "I'm not from Dyan, I'm from New Washington."

     "I know."

     "And I am a Navy officer, on assignment." She looked down at her
translucent harem set and tried to grin. "Well, not on duty just at the
moment-Kevin, this is not funny."

     "Well, maybe not. At least it wasn't hard to figure the direction."

     "Kevin-"

     "Point toward Earth and you're facing Jerusalem and Mecca both. No
difference from here. Same qiblah."

     "What has this got to do with anything?"

     "I read up on it once," Renner said. "When Mohammed first went to
Medina, he preached that the Jews and the Believers were one people, all
descended from Abraham, and they'd all have one Messiah. Maybe himself,
but that wasn't established. One God, Allah, who was the same as the
Jewish Jehovah. Mohammed venerated the Torah. Prayed toward Jerusalem."

     "Jerusalem? Kevin, why are we discussing this?'

     "So you won't brood about being insulted."

     "I still don't like it.'

     "Of course not. Neither does Bury. You're a guest. If you insist on
acting like one, Bury will cooperate. God knows what it would cost him,
though."

     "Oh." Ruth pulled a sheet up to her chin and wriggled farther down
into the covers holding her to the mattress. "All right. Tell me more.
Are you making all this up?"

     Renner smiled. "Nope. I'm told that in Medina there's a famous
mosque, called the mosque of the Two Qiblahs-"

     "Qiblah. Direction?'

     "Yeah, aspect. Direction the mosque faces. Mohammed sent letters to
the Jewish leaders inviting them to join him. They wouldn't. They said
you had to be a son of Jacob to inherit the kingdom and get all the
benefits of the prophecies, and Arabs didn't qualify since they were
only sons of Abraham."

     "And nobody cared about the daughters."

     "Not a bit. But for a couple of years they faced Jerusalem, not
Mecca, to do their prayers. But when the Jews rejected his offer,
Mohammed brooded about it. One morning, Mohammed was in the middle of
his prayers, facing Jerusalem, and all of a sudden he swung round to
face Mecca. Everybody else did, too, of course. And that's why Arabs and
Jews fight."

     "I never heard that."

     "True, though." Renner looked thoughtful. "Good thing, too. Can you
imagine what would have happened to Europe if the Jews and the Moslems
had been on the same side? Anyway that's the story of the Two Qiblahs.
Now for the fun part."

"Fun part?"

     "For the next two weeks we have this ship pretty well to ourselves.
The supply ship isn't the only one Bury had meet him here. He's got a
hospital ship that would make the Navy's doctors drool kittens. In about
three hours, Horace and the Viceroy and Buckman are going to board Mercy
of Allah, and by the time we get to New Ireland they'll be new men."

     "Wow. Aren't you included?"

     Renner grinned. "What's the matter, don't like the old one?"

     "Well, my opinion's on record, but it doesn't seem hardly fair.''

     "But who'd keep you company? Actually, I got rebuilt just before we
went to the Purchase. Time enough for touch-ups when we're in orbit and
I don't have piloting duties. But we'll be pretty much alone with the
staff most of the way into New Ireland."

     "I suppose it's just as well. I'm not sure I want to be around a
Kevin Renner with more energy than you've already got."

 

 

NEW CALEDONIA: Star system behind the Coal Sack with P8 primary star
cataloged as Murcheson A. The distant binary, Murcheson B, Is not pail
of the New Caledonia system. Murcheson A has six planets in five orbits,
with four inner planets, a relatively wide gap containing the debris of
an unformed planet, and two outer planets in a Trojan relationship. The
four inner planets are named Conchobar, New Ireland, New Scotland, and
Fomor, in their order from the sun, which is known locally as Cal, or
Old Cal, or the Sun. The two middle planets are inhabited, both
terraformed by First Empire scientists after Jasper Murcheson, who was
related to Alexander IV, persuaded the Council that the New Caledonian
system would be the proper place to establish an Imperial university. It
is now known that Murcheson was primarily interested in having an
inhabited planet near the red supergiant known as Murcheson's Eye. and
as he was not satisfied with the climate of New Ireland, he demanded the
terraforming of New Scotland as well.

     Fomor is a relatively small planet with almost no atmosphere and
few interesting features, It does, however, possess several fungi that
are biologically related to other fungi found in the Trans-Coal Sack sector.

     The two outer planets occupy the same orbit and are named Dagda and
Mider in keeping with the system's Celtic mythological nomenclature.
Dagda is a gas giant, and the empire maintains fuel stations on the
planet's two moons, Angus and Brigit. Merchant ships are cautioned that
Brigit is a Navy base and may not be approached without permission.

 

 

     "Which we won't need to do, thanks to Bury's supply ship," Renner
said, wiping the screen. "We're good all the way to New Ireland."

 

 

     NEW IRELAND: Second planet of the New Caledonia system. New Ireland
was terraformed by First Empire scientists under the influence of Jasper
Murcheson and was the original site of the Trans-Coal Sack branch of the
Imperial University until the campus was moved to New Scotland.

     The inhabitable areas of New Ireland are comparatively small and
confined to the temperate-zone areas adjacent to the single major sea.
Climate in the inhabitable zone is warm and pleasant. The soil is
fertile and there are few insects or other predators. Crop yields are high.

     New Ireland joined the Secessionists and continued the war long
after both New Ireland and New Scotland had become isolated from their
respective allies.

     Little industry has been rebuilt since the destruction sustained
during the Secession Wars. This was originally due to opposition from
New Scotland, but is now apparently the choice of the New Irish
Parliament. Consequently New Ireland remains a backwater with tourism as
the major source of hard currency

     New Ireland and particularly the region known as Deny, is fiercely
sought by Imperial Navy crews as a place for shore leave,

 

     Sinbad's B lounge was an add-on pod the shape of a lima bean. Ruth
Cohen had set the wall transparent. Andrew Mercer found her reading at a
viewscreen, with stars blazing around her and the Coal Sack behind her.
The blackness in the other direction was New Ireland's night side.

     He'd been watching the Coal Sack on and off ever since Sinbud
arrived iii New Cal system. He preferred not to let himself know that
the view made him uneasy. The vast black blot stretched across thirty
degrees of sky, in the shape of a hooded man with one glowing red eye.
Murcheson's Eye, the red supergiant, had a yellow fleck in it: the MOte.
And Ruth was a child in the arms of the Hooded Man, her face eerily lit
from underneath by the computer screen.

     Mercer moved around her to see over her shoulder.

     "Greetings, Your Highness." Ruth said.

     "Not for two more hours. I don't become Viceroy until we land."

"But you've been in the New Cal system for three weeks. And know you've
been reading reports and sending instructions."

     Mercer shrugged. "Two weeks of that was in the hands of Bury's
djinni." He stretched. "Do I look different?"

     "As a matter of fact, yes. Not much, but I can tell. I wonder how
long Bury will keep Mercy here?"

     "A while, I gather. He plans on some touch-ups. Thinking of taking
a turn in the tank?'

     "I just might once we settle in. It's not an opportunity I'll get
very often. So tomorrow's the big day. Why New Ireland instead of New
Scotland?"

     "Actually, Sir Kevin suggested it. After I thought it over, it did
seem a good idea to have the formal installation on New Ireland. Patch
up the old wounds. Let the New Irish know they're accepted. Even if I
can't begin work until we get to New Scotland."

     "Well, Trujillo got here first."

     Ruth scrolled back to the beginning of the news squib. Mercer read
over her shoulder

 

     Dateline Montenth 32, 3047. Derry, New Ireland. Mel-Ling Trujillo.
His Highness arrives tomorrow. Not only is this the first official visit
of an Imperial Viceroy to New Ireland since the wars ended, but Arthur
Calvin Mercer will be formally installed as Viceroy for His Majesty's
Domains Beyond the Coal Sack in the New Ireland Parliament building.

     The Government clearly expects this to be a big deal and has gone
all out to bring in official guests to witness the event. There will be
three days of official holiday. The New Cal branch of the Imperial
Traders Association has arranged for fireworks and is paying for an
all-day banquet.

     There's no question that among the best people of New Ireland

the installation will be the biggest show since INSS Terrible bombarded
Derry and ended New Ireland's secession eighty years ago.

     At tomorrow's ceremony the Fleet will be represented by three
ships, the largest a light cruiser, It seems none of the others in the
New Scotland naval yards is spaceworthy. When His Highness has had
enough pomp and ceremony and wants to get to work, he might start by
looking into the Yardmaster's records.

     Meanwhile, for most of New Ireland it's business as usual, and an
unusual business it is.

     For fifty-six years the province of Derry has been visited by the
Navy on leave. They were not always welcome; but they have always been
the source of money, and money heals many wounds. Today Derry is famous
for its welcome.

     The scars from Terrible's visit have long disappeared. Elsewhere on
the planet, much of Murcheson's careful terratorming has also
disappeared, leaving vast desert regions. But from the top of Romance
Crag. Derry still looks like farmland, miles of it in all directions.
The town is not one clump; it stretches arms along the crests of the
hills, with farmland below.

     In the streets it is quite different.

     The whores have a wholesome look, I questioned several, and I
always had the feeling that they were laughing at me, Uncorrupted. Part
of the answer is that I was never able to find one twice. "We come for a
little day trip, and maybe we make some money. Then it's back to work
with the pigs and the corn," Deirdre told me.

     She knows who her father is. Jaynisse doesn't, both thought it an
odd question.

     If you walk the streets of Derry, you'll find there aren't any
brothels, but there are whole blocks of hotels that will provide rooms
by the night or by the hour. Most of them have splendid room service.

     It is estimated that the average Able Spacer will leave three
months' pay on Derry. It you count in the petty officers, the average
Navy man spends nearly eighteen hundred crowns here. It is, by the way,
very much an average. The Navy people save for their visit here, but
they also gamble heavily.

     Navy men-I haven't found any women spacers who'll admit being
interested in Derry-tend to spend heavily, but it isn't all wine and
women. "I always go to the Dream Palace," the midshipman I'll call
Carlos Meredith told me. "You can bring your own game cassettes and
interface them and play the locals. Anything new from Sparta, the locals
love it. I usually win for the first day."

     Then he finds a girl and goes off to sleep and comes back the next
day and loses what he has left, "The locals are pretty quick with a new
game."

 

 

Ruth glanced up at Mercer. "There's more, but here's the tag." She
skipped to the end of the file.

 

 

     They find a lot to worry about in Government House, but in the
Fleet there's only one topic of conversation. Will the new Viceroy close
down Derry?

 

 

"Humpf," Mercer said, "Sir?" Ruth asked.

     "She can't mean that. No columnist could be dumb enough to think my
first act would be to close the one thing that makes blockade duty
tolerable."

 

     "Not much work for you here," Mercer said. 'No Outies anywhere, and
I can't see how the Secret Service could learn more about the Mote.
Maybe you'll find a plot on New Ireland."

     "It may not be that funny. There aren't many active anymore, but
the Rebel Alliance still exists, you know."

     "They threw a bomb at Governor Smelev. But that was years ago. I
think the worst we have to worry about on New would be getting too far
behind on our shots."

     The intercom saved Ruth from having to answer. "They finally
called," said Renner's voice. "All personnel, strap in. Ruth, come
forward. You don't know how to steal a spacecraft until you can land it."

 

     The inauguration ceremonies had begun at noon and lasted six hours.
The celebrities had gone their own ways. Now trucks were moving between
the barricades that lined Skid Street. The sun was still well up.

     Kevin and Ruth strolled along the main drag. Here was the Falling
Ship, a hotel made up of two-story buildings laid in squares, flowerbeds
between, aerial ramps linking the roofs. Kevin wondered what they were
charging for rooms with a view of Skid Street. A taller hotel could have
made considerably better profits on a day like this...but nothing stood
tall on New Ireland, not even the Palace.

     The trucks were opening like flowers. Ruth and Kevin stopped to
watch one unfold. In minutes it had become a bakery, and merrymakers
were swarming to buy fresh bread. Kevin bought a loaf, tore off two
pieces, and handed one to Ruth.

     They ate. "All right. You don't get this on shipboard," Ruth said.
"Let's find some fruit."

     "Crudits'?" Renner dropped what remained of the loaf and guided
her to a vegetable stand. The trucks had all looked alike; now all the
suddenly blooming stands were different, and the trucks within had
vanished. They munched carrots and a head sized radish as they walked.

     "I smell meat," Kevin said. "That way."

     "It's not all sex here," Ruth said.

     The sudden market already swarmed with women, young and
middle-aged, varying between comely and beautiful, but generally
good-looking. Men in Navy uniforms stopped to talk and found ready
companionship. "I never did get shore leave on New Ireland," Kevin said.
"We all knew it was what we wanted. Family cooking, fresh food, and
wholesome sex. Hard to say which a Navy man wants more, after a year
eating bioplast and yeast steaks. And marijuana. Even a little borloi.
They told me you can get drunk, too, but you have to go looking for
liquor, and it isn't in the rituals, if you follow me. No bars."

     "And you're finally in Derry, but there's a woman hanging on your arm,"

     "I'll tough it out somehow. And there's dinner. What the blazes is
it? Or was it?"

     A carcass roughly the size of an ox was roasting over a fire. Right
here in the street? Yes, but the fire was sitting on ribbed metal, the
fold-down side of another truck. New Irish kept things neat. The burly
proprietor cut them two slices and sealed them in plastic. They walked on.

     "Speaking of sex," Kevin said, "what did you think of Trujillo?"

     "I guess that look never goes out of style."

 

     "No makeup. You probably thought she was careless. Look like a
mouse, but wear a thin dress and no underwear. It turns men on. Worked
on you, didn't it?"

     "Point taken."

     Ruth sighed. "It only works when you're young. Maybe I will take
Bury up on his offer. Look, jugglers."

     "Did you like her?"

     "Trujillo? I'm not supposed to like her. She's no friend to the
Navy. But the real answer is I didn't get much chance to talk to her."

"You will,"

"Kevin?"

     "Weeks ago she requested passage to the Crazy Eddie Squadron. We
all decided she could ride aboard Sinbad."

     "Oh."

     "Bury's idea. He wants to convert her into a Motie hater." Renner
chuckled. "Fresh blood for His Excellency. Mercer heard Horace's spiel
so often he was ready to scream if anyone mentioned the Moties. He
already sent a letter of invitation."

     "Hmm. And you won't say whether she turns you on. I think I'd
better do some shopping. Or should I bother?"

     "Meaning?"

     "Meaning we both know this doesn't last forever. Getting tired of me?"

     "Not yet. Want out?"

     "Not yet." She nodded thoughtfully, then smiled. "We'll leave it
that way, then."

     Renner took out his pocket computer. "According to Ms. Trujillo's
article, the Brick Moon serves artichokes eighteen different ways. Room
service in the hotel next door. Interested?"

     "Mmm. Dammit, you've got me thinking like you."

     "How so?"

     "I want to see how the clerk acts when he sees you walk in with
off-planet competition."

 

 

2 The High Commission

 

 

The art of putting the right man in the right places is first in the
science of government; but that of finding places for the discontented
is the most difficult.

 

-Talleyrand

 

 

     NEW SCOTLAND: Third planet of the New Caledonia system. Originally
lifeless with extensive atmosphere of methane and water vapor, New
Scotland was terraformed by massive infusions of genetically engineered
microbes.

     The original colonists lived under domes...

 

New Scotland's major city was dominated by the Viceregal Palace. It
stood in the center of a series of concentric rings; much like medieval
cities on Earth, New Scotland's growth was controlled by the city's
defense technologies.

     Renner sent the small landing craft in a wide circle to dissipate
its speed. "There are some changes." He pointed to smaller built up
complexes out beyond the final ring. "All that's new since I was here.
They must think the war's finally over, to build outside the Field
protection."

     "The Moties have done that much good," Ruth Cohen said. "They've
got New Scotland and New Ireland thinking 'us' about each other. Except
at football games."

     "They do get a bit rough, don't they? Better than throwing bombs at
each other . . . well, some better anyway." But Moties wouldn't build
like that, he thought. Wouldn't build what they couldn't defend.

     The flier completed its circuit of the city. Renner brought it to
the landing area outside the black granite complex of Government House.
Bored Marine guards noted Ruth Cohen's Navy uniform and Renner's
expensive business clothes, perfunctorily took their identity cards and
inserted them into computer readers, glanced at the screen, and waved
them through into the courtyard. They got inside through an unlocked
French door leading into a maze of corridors. Renner tried to lead the
way to the Commission meeting rooms, but soon became lost. Finally he
stopped looking. "Ah. Here's a guard."

     They were directed to a different part of the building. Ruth Cohen
giggled.

     The last time I was here it was for a meeting in the Council
Chamber," Kevin said. "The big hail with a dome. Anybody could find
that. How was I to know they'd put the Commission off here in the Annex?"

     In contrast to the Grand Council Chamber, the Commission's meeting
room was strictly functional. There was no throne. The Viceroy's place
was merely an armchair at the center of the big table. The council table
was massive. It might have been wood, but Kevin didn't think so. Chairs
for advisers stood behind the table. In front there were seats for an
audience of fifty or so. Large view screens, now blank, dominated both
side walls.

     They had barely got into the room when a tall, balding man dressed
in dark, conservative business clothes thrust forward and held out his
hand. "Kevin. By God, you look good." He paused to look at Renner.
Colorful, too."

     Renner frowned for a moment, then grinned. Jack Cargill. Good to
see you." He turned to Ruth. "Commander-I guess it's 'admiral,' now,
isn't it?''

     Cargill nodded.

     "Ruth Cohen, meet Admiral Cargill. Jack was Exec in MacArthur,"
Kevin explained. "Are you still with the Crazy Eddie Squadron?"

     No, I'm on the High Commission."

     "Gosh. You're important. And to think we shared a cabin once."

     'Here's another Commissioner you know," Cargill said. "David." He
indicated a heavyset, balding man in clerical attire.

     "Father Hardy," Renner said. "Hey, it's good to see you again. What
have they done, loaded the Commission down with MacArthur crew?"

     "No, we're the only ones," David Hardy said. "And I'm not sure in
what capacity I'm here."

     Renner noted the large pectoral cross on Hardy's cassock.
"Everybody's been promoted. Bishop, eh? Do I kiss your ring, my Lord?"

     Hardy grinned. "Well, you're welcome to, but you're certainly not
part of my flock."

     "Sir?"

     "I'm missionary bishop to Mote Prime. Of course we don't have any
converts."

     "Sure of that?" Renner asked.

     "As a matter of fact, no," Hardy said. "I never did learn what
happened to my Fyunch(click), Not that he was a convert, exactly.
Anyway, I might be here as the Church's representative, or as the only
semanticist ever to visit Mote Prime-ah." He turned toward the door as
it opened. "Here's someone you need to meet again. I'm sure you
recognize him."

     A tall naval officer in uniform. He looked young to be a full
lieutenant, but then Kevin Christian Blaine's father had been a
lieutenant commander when only a couple of years older, and captain of
MacArthur a year after that. The aristocracy got promotions, but they
were also weeded out of the service if they couldn't keep up. Or used to
be, Renner thought.

     "Your godson, I believe," Hardy was saying.

     "Well, not that I exercised many of the duties of the office,"
Renner said. Blaine's handshake was firm. "And this is Ruth Cohen. How
are you, Kevin?"

     "Very good, sir. And I really appreciated the things you sent for
my birthdays. Some of the oddest stuff-holos, too. You sure got around,
Sir Kevin."

     "Kevin Renner, galactic tourist." Renner reached into a sleeve
pocket and took out a message cube. "On that score, your sister sent
this. She's on her way, in case you didn't know."

     "Thought she might be. I wondered if she might be coming with you.'

     "It would have been a bit crowded, and she had a lift. The
Honorable Frederick Townsend decided to visit New Caledonia."

 

     He probably thinks it was his idea," Renner guessed.

     "You've met Glenda Ruth, but not Freddy," Kevin Blaine observed. It
took Renner a moment to realize that he wasn't asking.

     The room began to fill. A half dozen Navy officers in uniform, led
by a commander who wore a ship's miniature badge indicating he was
master of a medium cruiser. They waved to Blaine, but stayed to
themselves on the other side of the room. A group of civilians sat in
adviser chairs and put their pocket computers on the arm-desks. Another
knot of Navy officers came in. They had white shoulder boards indicating
administrative branch and sat near but not with the combat officers.

     "The accountants," Cargill said. "Here to convince the world that
not one cent has ever been wasted."

     "Can they do that, sir?" Ruth asked.

     No." She seemed to expect more, so Cargill said, "No matter how you
slice it, blockade duty is long stretches of utter boredom. Spiced up
with random moments of sheer terror, of course, but that doesn't make up
for the boredom. Of course the men are going to misbehave. Officers,
too. We're just damned lucky to have troops who'll do it at all."

     The large double doors at the end of the room opened wide to admit
Bury in his travel chair. Renner clucked in disapproval:

Bury's doctors wanted him to spend more time exercising. Bury was
accompanied by Jacob Buckman and Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo.

     "She's wearing underwear today," Renner said. Ruth made a face at
him. If Blaine and Hardy heard the remark, they didn't comment.

     Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo was in fact quite well dressed, in a thin
silk afternoon dress that would have been fashionable on Sparta. She
carried a pocket computer large enough that she needed a bag for it.
Ruth Cohen sniffed. "Doesn't trust the central computer system to keep
records for her."

     "I've found journalists are often like that," Kevin Christian
Blaine said.

"Experience?" Renner asked.

"Quite a lot. The Navy likes me to do their talking. Bury, Buckman, and
Trujillo took places in the first row of the audience seats. Blaine
glanced at his watch. "I'd best be getting to my post."

"Me, too," Cargill said. "Dinner tonight, Kevin?"

"Yes, please. Anyplace special, or shall I ask Bury to invite youup to
Sinbad?"

"Sinbad, if you can swing it."

The double doors were thrown open again, and a palace functionary came
in. "My lords, ladies, and gentlefolk, His Highnessthe Viceroy."

Everyone stood. There was no other ceremony, but Mercer looked a bit
self-conscious as he took his place at the center of the big table. He
was joined at the table by Cargill and Hardy, and two others Renner
hadn't met. Their place cards named them as Dr. Arthur MacDonald and Sir
Richard Geary, Bart. Renner took a seat near Bury and scribbled on his
pocket computer.

 

     Arthur MacDonald, PhD. Professor New Scotland. Holds Blaine
Institute Chair of Xenobiology.

     Richard Geary, baronet. Investor. Member of Board of Regents,
University of New Scotland.

 

     There was more, but Mercer was tapping on the table with his gavel.
"I call this meeting of the Imperial Commission to order. Let the record
state that this is a public meeting. If there is no objection, we will
record the names of attendees.

     There were various chirps like a hundred crickets as the palace
central computer queried everyone's pocket computer to get the meeting
attendance list. Renner's computer beeped twice and then rattled. Heads
turned. Renner grinned.

     Mercer turned to the Commission secretary. "Mr. Armstrong."

     "Thank you, Your Highness," Armstrong said. His voice was thick
with the accent of New Caledonia. In deference to our guests, His
Highness has changed the meeting agenda to omit the opening formalities
and routine business. We therefore proceed directly to Item Four, the
report from the blockade squadron. His Highness has requested that the
fleet prepare a summary report covering the principal activities of the
squadron through the years, as well as a more detailed report of current
actions. The report will be presented by Lieutenant the Honorable Kevin
Christian Blaine, executive officer of INSS Agamemnon."

     Chris Blaine stood near the large screen that dominated one wall of
the room. "Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Your Highness."

     "The blockade force is formally known as the Eleventh Fleet, or
Battle Fleet Murcheson's Eye. The mission of Battle Fleet Murcheson's
Eye is to intercept any and all ships entering the Empire from the
Mote-to enforce the blockade decreed by this Commission. Blockade duty
is hard duty, and the officers and men of the Blockade Fleet are proud
of our record of one hundred percent success. We have achieved that
success in spite of many very real difficulties."

     Renner's thoughts chased each other:

     I wonder who wrote that for him?

     Still, the Crazy Eddie Squadron would have driven me nuts.

     Heyyy . . . He dared not speak his next thought. Chris doesn't
sound that bloody convincing, does he? Why not? Raised by Mediators- He
doesn't believe what he's saying.

     Blaine gestured, and the wall screen lit up to show a wide-angle
view of a dozen blobs ranging in color from black to dull red in a
bright red glowing background. "The Alderson point from the Mote lies
within the supergiant star. Ships can't stay on station very long, so
there's a continual circulation of ships from outside the star to the
blockade station. They stay until they're too hot, then they go outside
to cool off.

     "Motie breakout attempts can happen at any time."

     Four new blobs, all dead black, popped into existence on the
screen. Imperial ships became floodlight beams as fusion drives lit
within the red-hot murk. The screen showed the beginnings of a space
battle. Bright threads sprang between the ships. Torpedoes raced out.

     "You're shooting with no warning!" someone said. Renner looked
around to see Joyce Mei-Ling looking embarrassed, clearly not having
meant to speak aloud.

     Blaine said, "We wouldn't be telling them anything they don't know,
Ms. Trujillo. The best time to hit the Motie ships is during Jump shock,
when their automated systems are shut down. If we wait until they've
recovered enough to communicate, we might not be able to catch them at
all. The rules of engagement acknowledge that."

"A question, Lieutenant."

"Yes, Your Highness?"

"Suppose they wanted to negotiate. To surrender?"

"They may well try to," Blaine said. "But how could we know? They cannot
come through with no Field. The star would cook them. We can't wait
until they get out of the eye, or we'd lose them entirely. This was
debated in the first meeting of the Commission, and the rules of
engagement were adopted then. They haven't been changed because there's
no way to change them, Your Highness. The way to surrender is not to
come through."

Mercer nodded thoughtfully. "Proceed, Lieutenant."

Renner glanced over at Bury. He was watching, fascinated, but seemed
calm. Probably tranquilized to the eyes.

"Motie breakout attempts have ranged from the simple to ingenious,"
Blaine said.

The screen showed a kaleidoscope of actions. Single ships; armadas of
ships; cluster ships that came apart like grenades and scattered; ships
that came out at enormous velocity, tearing meteor trails through
orange-hot gas.

"Now, this one was a beauty," Chris Blaine said with what had to be
pride. They watched an iceball two kilometers across emerge from the
invisible Alderson point. "Four days after I joined the Crazy Eddie
Squadron, at the noon watch    The squadron chased after it. The
comet-head left a comet-trail of itself as it plunged through the
rarefied star-stuff. It dwindled, evaporated, exposing black beads:
ships in Langston Field bubbles that raced off in random directions to
be chased down by squadron ships.

"Of course we can't send all our ships against any single attempt,"
Blaine said. "There always has to be a reserve. Since there's no
possible way the information could get back to the Mote, I suppose it's
safe to say that sometimes that reserve has gotten critically thin."

Chris sounds better, surer. This part he knows, Renner thought;it's the
cover-up he doesn't like. "He's pretty good," he said to Ruth Cohen.

"Given his training, he damned well ought to be," Ruth replied. The
presentation continued. There were clips of the men amusing themselves
on long watches. Then more battle scenes.

     "Lately the Moties have a new trick," Blaine said. "They're sending
what we've termed 'token ships.' These are unmanned ships, really only
the framework of a ship, just an Alderson Drive and two tanks and a
fusion motor. With this one, the sixth, we held off to see if it would
do anything."

     It didn't. They saw an absurd stick-figure of a ship pop into
existence at low velocity and immediately begin to melt.

     Mercer cleared his throat. Commander, do you have any theories on
why they would send such things?"

     "No, Your Highness. They come one at a time; no Field, they're easy
to shoot down. No attempt to send messages. If they wanted us off guard,
why send anything at all? It's as if they want us to be alert. We've
speculated that they may want to locate the Alderson point more
precisely-at their end, in Mote system-but they know that well enough to
send ships through at point one percent of lightspeed. We can't do that."

     'Hah," Renner said. Everyone looked in his direction. "I think I know-"

"Yes, of course," Buckman said. He stood up. "Sir Kevin is right."

     "Jacob-" Bury said. His voice was surprisingly strong.

     "Oh. Um. Yes, of course. Cal-Your Highness, should I explain?"

     Mercer was nodding gloomily. No surprises here. "Please do, Dr.
Buckman~"

     "They're not trying to locate the Alderson point, they're proving
that it's still there."

     "Still there?" Jack Cargill sounded shocked. "Excuse me, Dr.
Buckman, but why the devil shouldn't it be there?'

     "Because it will move when the protostar collapses," Buckman said.
"Renner, you seem to be good at talking to amateurs. Maybe you ought to
tell them."

     They listened as Kevin Renner talked. Kevin watched their eyes for
bewilderment or comprehension, watching-he didn't realize it at
first-for Kevin Christian Blaine's surprise or disbelief. But Blaine's
eyes widened in a slap-my-head Eureka! reaction: old knowledge falling
into place. Oh, Lord, he believes it.

     "I see," Bishop Hardy said. "I think I understand. But as the least
technical person on the Commission, perhaps I should summarize and the
experts can tell me if I've left anything out."

     "Please," Mercer said.

     "We are now convinced that the Moties deceived us about their
stellar observations, particularly regarding the protostar. They
convinced Dr. Buckman that the protostar will not ignite for from
centuries to millennia. It now appears that it may collapse and ignite
at any time. Might even have done so already."

     "Yes," Buckman said. His voice was grim. "I have to give young
Arnoff credit. He was right."

     "When it ignites," Hardy said, "the Eleventh Fleet will be guarding
an entry point that no longer exists."

     "Well, may not, and will have moved a considerable distance in any
case," Buckman said. "I've been working on the geometry, but with much
of the data suspect it's hard to be exact. Everything depends on the
violence of the collapse and the brightness of the new star."

     "Yes," Hardy said. "In any event, their first warning would be when
the Jump point in Murcheson's Eye moves. Meanwhile, we expect at least
one more unguarded Alderson point leading from the Mote into normal
space rather than to the inside of a star. And since Alderson Path
events happen nearly instantaneously, all this will happen before any
light from the protostar reaches us-or reaches the Mote. And therefore
you have concluded that the Moties are hurling these cheap probes, these
tokens, through periodically to see if the old Point has moved."

     "Precisely," Buckman said.

     There was a long, low whistle from the skipper of Agamemnon.

     "Your pardon, Highness."

     "Not at all, Commander Balasingham, I nearly did the same myself,"
Mercer said. "The situation appears serious indeed. One question. The
Navy has ways to determine the location, and thus presumably the
existence, of Alderson points without sending ships through them. Don't we?"

     Yes, Your Highness," Commander Balasingham said. He nervously
stroked his thick mustache.

     So why the tokens?"

     "Disturbances?" Renner said.

"Sir Kevin?"

     "Back when I was a navigator, finding an Alderson point was one of
the trickiest things we could do. It's never easy, and it's impossible
during heavy sunspot activity or during a battle, because Alderson
events are very responsive to thermonuclear fluxes."

     "You think there may be thermonuclear bombs going off in the Mote
system?"

     "It wouldn't surprise me, sir."

     "Nor me," Bishop Hardy said.

     Joyce Mel-Ling Trujillo had sat quietly during all this. Now she
came to her feet. "May I ask..."

     "Please," Mercer said.

     "You're suggesting that the Moties are about to get out."

     Renner said, "Right."

     "But that's-" She looked at Bury, who was staring ahead with
unseeing eyes, his breathing carefully controlled. "Shouldn't we do
something?"

     Everyone spoke at once. And Bury's eyes flicked up at her. Rage and
despair, and a sudden twitch of a mad smile.

     Mercer tapped on the table with his gavel. "Of course Ms. Trujillo
is correct," he said. "We should do something. The question is what? And
I'm not certain that subject needs debate in a public meeting."

     "Why not? Who doesn't belong here?" Trujillo demanded.

     "Well, you for one," Commissioner MacDonald said. "I dinna believe
we need the press here. Your Highness, I move that we adjourn this
public meeting and go into executive session."

     "I expected something like this," Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo said.

     Commissioner MacDonald seemed astonished. "That's more than I did."

     "Cover-up all the way. Corruption in the fleet, so hide it with
something else. Mr. Bury, your reputation precedes you."

     Bury glared. Mercer said, "Madame, I was well aware that the Moties
had lied to us. That was a secondary purpose for this meeting. I . . .
would have thought we'd have more time. These 'tokens'-"

     "Your Highness, I've found enough evidence of corruption that they
can smell the stench on Sparta. In a sense I've caused this commission,
and in the first meeting you want to go into executive session! So far
as I am concerned, the council has evaded the question of corruption in
the Crazy Eddie Fleet. Do you really expect me to go along with this
massive sense of urgency?"

     In the moment before anyone could explode, Kevin Blaine caught
Mercer's eye. "Excuse me, my Lord, but she does have a point."

     Looks of fury turned on Blaine, but MacDonald said, "In what
fashion, Lieutenant?"

     "Urgency. Let us look at this as a gambling situation. What's the
expected return here, the pot odds? The Moties persuaded Dr. Buckman
that Mote system could be bottled up for between five hundred and two
thousand years. If they thought that lie was worth telling, the expected
date must be conspicuously sooner. It can't be much more than a hundred
years, could it? That gap wouldn't be worth hiding.

     "Call it thirty to seventy years. We've eaten thirty. Twenty years
left, with a fat margin of error. Why the rush?" Blaine turned to
Trujillo. "Right?"

     "And we know it hasn't gone off yet!"

     "Well, not last month. There'd be some delay before we heard from
the Crazy Eddie Fleet. The Jump point from the Eye to here would move.
But the urgency is because of these token ships. They indicate that the
Moties are ready now. The margin of error could still be large, of
course," Blaine was talking directly to Trujillo now, "but we're in a
maniacal rush so we can get something into place. Anything. Ultimately
we'll move some ships from the Crazy Eddie Squadron so they can sit on
their asses for twenty years. Or forty, fifty-"

     "Or twenty days," Bury muttered.

     "And why shouldn't the press be watching that?" Mei-Ling demanded.
"Nothing said here can get back to the Moties. You're only keeping
secrets from the public!"

     "What's said here can get back to Outies," MacDonald said. "And to
traitors who might well like to see harm come to the Empire while our
strength is massed against the Moties. It's no been so long since the
New Irish threw bombs at the Governor General, you know. Madam, I've no
doubt of your loyalty, but I do believe you have heard aye more than is
safe already. I would no care to see any of this on the tri-vee. Were it
left to me-"

     "Commissioner MacDonald has a point," Mercer said. "Miss Trujillo,
I must ask you to hold what you have heard here in strict confidence."

     "Suppress a good story?" She smiled thinly. "I wonder if you can
make me do that?"

     Commissioner MacDonald said, "Your Highness, the law is very clear
regarding threats to the Empire. Is this no a state of emergency? You
have but to declare one."

     "Even that can't stop me from writing about corruption and this
council's evasions," Trujillo said. She paused to let that sink in. "But
I'm willing to cooperate. Of course there's a condition."

     "What is your condition?" Mercer asked.

     "Let me find out the rest of the story."

     "What?" MacDonald was outraged.

     "Let me finish," she said. "I'll take whatever oath you like- oath
of the privy council, isn't it?-and promise not to publish anything,
including what I've already heard, until you agree it's safe. But I want
to know. I want to be in on the whole story, Moties, corruption in the
fleet, all of it."

     "Hmm." Mercer looked around the room, then down at the screen set
discreetly into the table in front of him. "It would appear that you are
the only problem guest, Ms. Trujillo. Everyone else here is already
under one or another obligation to keep the secrets of the Empire."

     "Him?" Trujillo pointed at Horace Bury.

     "As a condition of my accompanying him on his journey to this
system, His Excellency and all his crew consented to the conditions of
the privy council," Mercer said. It would have made for an uncomfortable
trip without that."

     "I see. All right. Anyway, I've said I'll take your oath."

     "Commander Cohen?" Mercer said. "I make no doubt the Navy has
already done a thorough investigation of Miss Trujillo. Has your service
any objections?"

     "I don't think so. Joyce, you do understand what you're doing? You
are voluntarily placing yourself under the restrictions of the Official
Secrets Acts. The penalties can include exile for life on any world of
His Majesty's choosing."

     Yes, I know. Thank you for the warning. But this is the only way
I'll ever find out, isn't it? And if the Moties really are coming out,
that will be the biggest story ever."

     "If the Moties really are coming out, it will mean war," MacDonald
said. "And you'll be under wartime restrictions."

     "Are you objecting to including Ms. Trujillo in our official family
of advisers?" Mercer asked.

     "No, my Lord. Not really."

     "All right," Mercer said. "Let's get on with it. Mr. Armstrong, if
you'll do the honors."

     The Commission secretary fingered his own computer controls. "Miss
Trujillo, if you will face His Highness. Raise your right hand and read
from the screen in front of you."

 

     "First things first," Mercer said. "Admiral Cargill, I presume
you've sent a standby signal to every ship in the system? Thank you. So
just what ships have we?"

     "It's bad timing," Cargill said. "We've got three frigates in
transit from the Crazy Eddie Squadron to New Cal-"

     "God is good," Bury muttered. The other three turned to him, and he
grinned like a death's head. "They came through. The Jump point hasn't
moved since ... two weeks ago?"

     "Yes, but the ships themselves are all in need of repair. Not a lot
of use. Then, a sovereign-class battleship with three general class
battle cruisers and assorted light escort ships jumped out to the Eye
three hundred hours ago. There's no way to recall them except to send a
messenger ship after them. Nothing else closer than the Crazy Eddie
Squadron. Doctor, do we have any damn idea where we'd want to put a
second fleet?"

"This is only a first cut," Buckman said.

After a moment Cargill said, "Cut away."

     Jacob Buckman tapped at keys. A string of numbers appeared on all
the consoles. "There. And maybe there."

     "Uh." Renner looked at the screen. "Right. We'll almost certainly
get a Jump point at MGC-R-31. That's a smallish star eleven light-years
toward the hem of the Hooded Man figure. Eight light years from the
Mote. Then we might get one at MGC-R-60, a brighter star a little nearer
the Mote, but that one would lead into Murcheson's Eye. Beyond that .. .
Jacob? Something in the Coal Sack itself?"

     "Probably not, but even so, Murcheson's Eye dominates."

     "So it's just this . . . red dwarf," Mercer said. "Well, we've got
to put something there, and I prefer it be now. So what do we'

have?"

     "There's Balasingham's Agomemnon," Cargill said. "A Menulaus-class
cruiser. Good ship. I presume you're ready, Balasingham?"

     "Admiral, we can boost out as soon as I'm aboard," Commander
Balasingham said. "I sent up orders to round up the crew and refuel as
soon as I understood what Dr. Buckman was saying."

     "Then there's the Atropos frigate," Cargill said.

     "Sir, I took the liberty of asking her skipper to put that ship on
full alert, too," Balasingham said.

     "Good," Cargill said. 'Unfortunately, Your Highness, except for
some messenger boats and merchantmen, there isn't anything else. The
battle cruiser Marlborough is in the Yards, but it will take a minor
miracle to get her out in under a month."

     "Nothing coming in?"

     "Not for a month," Cargill said. "We'll send messengers out to
scrape up what we can find, but-"

     "The upshot is that we've little enough to send to watch the new
Alderson point," Mercer said. "Two ships."

     "Three, Your Highness," Bury said.

     Mercer looked at him sharply. "Horace, are you all right?" Bury
tried to laugh. The sound that came out was more ghastly than humorous.
"Why should I not be? Highness, the worst has happened. The Moties are
loose."

     'We don't know that," someone said.

     "Know?" Bury demanded. Of course we don't know. But it is- easier
to think that way. Highness, there is no time to waste. Let us take
whatever we have to the new Alderson point. Kevin, I presume you and
Jacob know where it will appear?"

     "Close enough for government work. It isn't a point, it's an arc
four light-minutes long," Renner said.

     "We go, then. Agamemnon, Atropos, and Sinbad."

     "Why Sinbad?" Commander Balasingham asked. "She's not even armed!"

     "You might be surprised," Mercer said. "Jacob, will you go with them?"

     Buckman nodded. "I expected to. And I'd much prefer to work aboard
Sinbad than a Navy ship. I remember trying to work aboard MacArthur.
Everyone felt entitled to get in my way, block my sightings, move my
equipment-"

     "Renner, you can't keep up with us," Balasingham said.

     Renner shrugged. "We won't be all that far behind. At worst, we're
witnesses, we can report back. Your destruction will make prime-time news."

     Bury scowled. "I suppose the Trujillo woman . . . yes, of course.
She would have gone with us to the Eye, after all. We should be on our
way now. Now. Allah is merciful. We may yet be there before the Moties.
We must be there before the Moties."

 

 

3 Communications

 

 

In the name of Allah, most benevolent, ever merciful.

Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of men,

The King of men,

From the evil of him who breathes temptations into the

 minds of men,

Who suggests evil thoughts to the hearts of men-

From among the djinns and men.

 

-al-Qur'an

 

 

 

     On their last night together, Kevin told Ruth, "I'd take you with
me if I could find any kind of excuse. Good or bad."

     "Would you?"

     "Yeah. We're crowded as hell, you know. We've dropped part of the
kitchen, we're carrying a drop tank   She wasn't buying it. "Love, when
we get back into the Empire, it'll make the news. Contact me then?
You've got my work number."

     "I gave you mine." She looked down at her sleeves. The three rings
of a full commander had just been sewn on. "Of course we're likely to be
in different solar systems."

     And it really felt like good-bye.

     From New Scotland to the Jump would take nearly two weeks.
Agamemnon and Atropos started later, but were moving at two gravities of
thrust; they would Jump just ahead of Sinbad. Sinbad could beat them
there with the drop tank's extra fuel, but Kevin refused to subject Bury
to more than one gee. He would have preferred less.

     This trip wasn't like the voyage from Sparta. Sinbad felt like a
different ship. Attitudes had changed.

 

     With Mercer gone, the kitchen storage region could carry cargo more
appropriate to their mission. It didn't matter much. Sinbad's kitchen
was styled to feed Horace Bury: to create small, healthful meals rich in
flavor for a man whose taste buds were almost dead of old age. Now that
program served Renner, too. Renner could diet between suns, when fresh
food was unavailable anyway. Blaine, a lord's son but also Navy,
expected no better. Buckman never noticed what he ate, and as for Joyce
Mei-Ling Trujillo

     "Ms. Trujillo, are you getting fed all right?"

     "Lieutenant Blaine asked me that, too. I eat whatever's where the
story is, Mr. Renner. I'd say you set a fine table, but-have you ever
eaten streaker rat? By the way, you'll be calling me Joyce eventually,
won't you? Start now."

     Perhaps Bury derived some satisfaction from what Joyce didn't know
she was missing. He made no great effort to avoid her; he wasn't agile
enough. In her presence he could be affable, but he called her Trujillo.

     And so the ship was settling down, and Kevin Renner was enjoying
his freedom.

     Freedom. Ridiculous. He was surrounded by people, by walls, by
obligations . . . and yet this was his place of power. Horace Bury's
ship; but then, he was Bury's superior officer in the Secret Service.
Sinbad went where he willed . . . except that with the Empire of Man at
stake, his will had best take Sinbad straight through to MGC-R-31.

     Over the past quarter of a century Kevin Renner and Horace Hussein
Bury had evolved routines and rituals. One was coffee after dinner.

     "She is attractive enough," Bury said. He sipped at the thick,
sweet brew. "I know planets where she could be sold at a high price." He
chuckled softly. "Not as many as there once were, thanks to our efforts.
Perhaps we could arrange to use her as bait   

     "She'd be good at that. For a good enough story she'd volunteer,"
Renner said.

     Bury fingered his beard and waited.

     "Only guessing," Renner said. "I really haven't spent much time
with her at all."

     "So I noticed."

     "Yeah. Well, put it down to complications. We've got all the time
in the world just now, but that could change. Or not. Most likely thing
is we spend a boring six months in an empty solar system until an
Imperial fleet comes in and chases us out."

     If so, Miss Trujillo will be desperate for distractions," Bury
said. "I would presume from anyone willing to provide them."

     "Hmpf. Truth is, Horace, it feels good to be-unencumbered."

     "The Devil he blew an outward breath, for his heart was free from
care."

     Renner grinned. "Something like that." And maybe she wants
something I can't deliver.

     "I cannot say Allah has not been merciful. It would not do to
presume too much on His mercy," Bury said.

     "And that's the truth. We'll be to the I-point soon enough. What's
happening there could tear everybody's leisure all to hell."

 

     "I still don't understand," the Honorable Frederick Townsend said.
"And I don't think I ever will."

     "I'm sorry," Glenda Ruth said. She looked around the ship's lounge.
I think I know every rivet and seam. Hecate was not much larger than a
messenger ship. She was fast, but not overly comfortable. Freddy
Townsend had bought her for racing, not for long distance cruising.
Compartments had been added for ship's stores and one servant, but
everything was cramped. "I should have gone with Kevin-"

     "You needn't start that again, either," Freddy said. "I suppose you
could have gone with them, but why? I'm glad to do you the favor. I like
doing things for you. As you must know. But-" Freddy looked up in
irritation as Jennifer Banda came into the lounge. "Dinner in half an
hour," he said. "Guess I'll get washed up."

     Frederick Townsend insisted on dressing for dinner. It had seemed a
bit silly at first, but at least it broke up the monotony. The ship was
mostly automated, with oniy the ship's engineer, Terry Kakumi, as crew.
The only servant was George, a retired Navy coxswain who served as cook,
butler, valet, and sometimes piloted the ship as well. Having one nearly
formal meal each day gave everyone something to do.

 

     Jennifer waited until Freddy had left the lounge before she spoke.
"I walk into something heavy?"

     Glenda Ruth shrugged. "No heavier than usual. Glad you came in,
though."

     "You're driving that boy crazy," Jennifer said. "Sure you want to
do that?"

     "No, I'm not sure I want to do that."

     "Want to tell me about it?"

     "Not really. Yes. What Freddy is too polite to say is, 'You went to
bed with me when we took the trip after graduation, so why won't you
sleep with me now?'"

     "Oh. I didn't know. I mean, I know what's happened since we left
Sparta. Or what hasn't happened. Glenda Ruth, no wonder he's going nuts!
I mean-" Jennifer stopped.

     "I know what he had every right to expect."

     "All right, so why? Bad experience the first time?"

     "No." Glenda Ruth's voice was very low and small. "Not a bad
experience." Silence; then, "You've studied Moties."

     Jennifer smiled. "But I was raised by an all-human orchestra."

     "Right. I picked up attitudes from the Moties. Consider that I can
refuse to mate. From twelve to seventeen years of age I just plain
enjoyed that. Then, consider that I can refuse to get pregnant."

     "Freddy?"

     "Yes. Sure. I've known him since we shared a crib. And we had just
under a month . . . which was just about right for both of us to get to
know our bodies. Something I wasn't likely to learn from Moties.
Jennifer, I wish to hell I could tell him all this."

     Jennifer was folded up like a stick figure into her web chair.
"Ruth, I haven't heard a problem yet."

     "Sometimes it takes a while before I feel the vibes. Particularly
with vague, murky attitudes. You know?" Glenda Ruth was turned away,
looking at the universe in a picture-window display. "My parents don't
think it's right to take a bed partner before I'm married, or at least
engaged, but they're not sure, so I can live with that. Freddy's parents
are sure, but I can live with that, too."

     Glenda Ruth turned around. "But Freddy's maybe half sure his
parents are right, and it was two months after the trip before I
realized it, while I was dancing with him, and what it amounts to is
this. By the way, I really appreciate you listening."

     "Okay."

     "And understanding. Only a damn Motie expert could listen to this
and not try to send me to a confessor. Okay. If I sleep with Freddy,
it's because we're going to get married or it's because I'm a slut. I'm
not sure I want to marry him, and I'm not sure I don't. Either way would
be okay, but I'm hung up, so

     "No man would understand that line of argument, counselor."

     "Freddy's not stupid. He'd know, he'd understand, if I could say it
right. So I'm still thinking. Damn."

     "He'd marry you-"

     Glenda Ruth grinned. "Like a shot. But-look, all my life-"

     All eighteen years."

     "Well, it's a lifetime to me." Poor Charlie didn't last much
longer, Glenda Ruth thought. "All my life I've had someone who could
tell me what to do. Had the right to tell me. Now I don't. Now I've got
my own money, and I'm legally an adult. Freedom! It's wonderful. The
last thing I need is a husband."

     "Maybe it's better this way. You sure keep the Honorable Freddy
attentive!"

     "Oh, damn, it does look that way, doesn't it? He hasn't seen it, but-"

     'It'll be all right. Last jump tonight. We'll be on New Scotland in
three weeks. Freddy can find another girl." Jennifer grinned. "Don't
like that either? Honey, you are in what the Navy calls an untenable
position."

 

     Her cabin was small, like all the cabins on Hecate. The only
spacious cabin belonged to Freddy. Of course he'd expected her to share it.

     Why don't I? she wondered. I lie awake thinking about it. It's not
like I don't have my pills, or Freddy has some kind of disease. It's not
like I didn't-all I'd have to do is go tap on his door.

Maybe I'd lose him. Can't he be replaced? I can pick any stranger out of
a crowd and know if he's sane, trustworthy, intelligent, horny,
crosswired, docile. I hear women say they don't understand men, and I
want to snicker- There was a sharp wrenching sensation, and she felt
sick and confused. Somewhere in the back of her mind she knew the ship
had made an Alderson Jump, and she was in the grip of the disorientation
that always followed. Her father had told her there were a dozen
explanations of Jump shock, all inconsistent with each other, but no one
had ever been able to disprove any of them.

     Gradually control returned. She moved her fingers, then her hands
and arms, until they did what she wanted them to. Freddy always
recovered faster than she did. She resented that. Not fair.

     And now they were in New Caledonia system. Maybe Freddy would drop
her off and go on to New Ireland. . . . She had just settled in to try
to sleep when her intercom chirped

     "Glenda Ruth."

     It was Freddy, of course. What in the world did he want? Hah. Well,
why not? If he could stand her in this condition. It wouldn't take long
to get cleaned up. She tapped the intercom button.

     "Hi. Look, I hate to disturb you, but we've got a message for you."

     "What?"

     "There's a trader ship here, the New Baghdad Lion."

"Here?"

     "Here. Waiting at the Jump point. They say they have a message for
the Honorable Glenda Ruth Fowler Blaine. They need your identification
code."

     "Oh. All right, I'll be right there. You're on the bridge?"

"Yep."

     "Be right up. And-Freddy, thanks."

     "No problem. Bring your computer"

     This sounded urgent, but she took the time to get dressed, the
baggy trousers gathered at the ankles that were standard for low
gravity. She also took time to put on an Angora sweater, comb her hair,
and dab on lipstick. The ship was under slight acceleration, just enough
to bold her slippers to the carpet. She made her way forward. Freddy was
alone on the bridge.

     He indicated the copilot chair. "They're standing by for your code."

     She plugged her personal computer into the ship's system.

"Clementine."

     Yes, dear. The words scrawled across her computer screen.

     "We're supposed to identify ourselves," Glenda Ruth said. "This is
me. Now prove it to them."

     Password.

     "Damn it all, you know it's me. All right." She sketched rapidly
with the stylus; not words, but a cartoon.

     Right you are. There was no sound, but she knew the computer was
sending an encrypted message that could be decoded using her public key.
It hardly mattered what the message was, since only messages encrypted
with her secret key could be decoded with her public key. The
public/secret key system made for positive identifications as well as
secure Communication.

     "Acknowledged," a voice said on the ship's speakers. It was a voice
thick with Levantine accent. "Greetings to Miss Glenda Ruth Fowler
Blaine. Please prepare to record an encoded message from Lieutenant
Kevin Christian Blaine."

     Ah," Freddy said. "Standing by. Ready. Got it. Thank you, New
Baghdad Lion."

     "You are welcome. We have been instructed to offer you fuel."

     "Fuel. Why would we want more fuel?" Freddy asked.

     The Levantine voice was unperturbed. "Effendi, His Excellency told
us to offer you fuel. We offer it. It will not take long to transfer.
Shall we do so?"

     Freddy looked to Glenda Ruth. "Now what?"

     She shrugged. "They're bigger than we are, and if they wanted to do
us any harm they'd have done it. Why not let them top off your tanks?"

     "Lot more than topping off," Freddy said. "All right. New Baghdad
Lion, we accept your offer with gratitude." He punched an intercom
button. "Terry, that merchantman's going to pump us some hydrogen. Give
them a hand, will you? You have the con."

     "Aye, aye. I relieve you," the engineer said.

     Freddy shook his head. 'But just what is all this in aid of?"

     "Maybe this will tell us," Glenda Ruth said.

     The message had been encrypted using her public key. She set
Clementine to decoding it.

     Kevin Christian Blaine to Glenda Ruth Fowler Blaine. The rest does
not break in clear, the computer informed her.

     "Hah. Use Kevin's special code."

     Willco. She adjusted her earphones and waited. Everyone wasassured
that the public-key/private-key system was secure against everything.
Maybe we're just paranoid.

     She heard, "Sis, we have a problem. The Moties could be loose by
the time you get this."

     Freddy was watching her. "Ruth, what's wrong?"

     "Nobody's dead. Shh." In the boredom and the interpersonal
dominance games, she'd had weeks to forget that she was frightened for
the Moties. Now- Her brother's voice said, "We're taking three ships to
the incipient Alderson point, the I-point, at MGC-R-31. Two Navy ships,
and Bury's Sinbad. I've been put aboard Sinbad as liaison. I'm the
senior Navy officer aboard, but I catch vibes from Renner. He can show
he ranks me if he wants to. Maybe by a lot. The other Navy officer who
came out here with Sinbad, an Intellisence lieutenant commander, decided
she was needed back on New Scotland.

     "I don't think of a lot we can do there by ourselves. The Moties
have had a quarter century to prepare for this, and we're just now
realizing we have a problem. I can't think three ships will have any
surprises for them.

     "The pot odds say we'll get there with ten to twenty years leeway,
but there are complications. Odd things happening. It might be a lot
sooner. There's even a chance it happened already.

     "Sis, I sure wish we had the latest the Institute has developed. So
does Mr. Bury. If you can get that to us, it might change things. I've
attached our best-guess coordinates for the I-point. We thought about
waiting for you, but we don't know just how long we have before
everything happens. Bury arranged for the ship that gave you this
message to refuel yours. Let them, if you haven't done that already. Try
to get to the I-point before the Moties do.

     "Sinbad's crowded. Bury's got Nabil and three women including
Cynthia, no change in the relationships. There's me, Dr. Jacob Buckman,
and Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo, the newscaster. She's interesting.
Intelligent and wants to prove it, female and doesn't have to. Commander
Cohen decided she was needed on New Scotland just after Trujillo was
invited aboard, and that leaves Renner loose. Interesting patterns here.

     "You may get here and find nothing's happening at all. Some of the
blockade fleet may be en route already, but of course it'll take them
months. If things last that long, maybe there won't be a problem, or
maybe Mom's Crazy Eddie project will work just fine and we can think on
how to use it.

     "Or it may be all over before you get here. If they send through

a big fleet with Warriors." If they do that, you'll talk to the Master
in charge. If we have the symbiote, maybe she'll listen. If you live
long enough to talk, Glenda Ruth thought. If.

     And her brother's voice ran on: "Anyway, we're going for a look. It
will probably help if you can get here pretty quick, but you do what you
think best.

     Love, Chris."

     She reset and heard the message through again. "Freddy?"

     "Yes, my love?"

     She let it pass. "Freddy, we're being given fuel so that we can go
direct to"-she punched in the coordinates from Kevin Blaine's message,
and the navigation screen lit up-"here, instead of going to New Scotland
first."

     Freddy studied the display. "That's a wretched red dwarf system.
There's nothing there."

     "There will be."

     "Glenda Ruth, do you know what you're doing?"

     "I think so. It's no trivial thing, Freddy-"

     "All right." He turned to the computer.

     "No trivial thing at all. I don't exaggerate, do I? So. The fate of
the Empire and the fate of the Motie species' '-he hadn't paused- "it's
all on our shoulders. I didn't even bother to ask Jennifer, she's worked
up to this her whole life, but you-"

     He'd finished typing in the course change. A warning note sounded,
then they felt gentle acceleration. Hecate was now on route to MGC-R-31.
Freddy relaxed in his chair, tired, not looking at her.

     Didn't wait. Didn't need to think it over. Just trusted me and moved.

     And she saw that it would break him. He would heal, over the years,
almost; but his view of women of his class would be colored by a period
of terrible frustration while his life was bent to one powerful woman's
missionary urge.

     She made a bet with herself, no trivial thing at all, and said,
"I'll be moving into your cabin, if your offer's still open."

     He looked up, and searched among possible answers while hiding his
surprise. She held her expression solemn, a bit uneasy. Freddy nodded
and smiled and took her hand, and still feared to speak.

 

 

 

     Chris Blaine reminded Kevin of someone. Of Captain Roderick Blaine,
of course, but of someone else, too . .. and he finally got it as Chris
paused at a window. Kevin had seen Midshipman Horst Staley looking out
at Murcheson's Eye blazing against the Coal Sack, like a single coal red
eye within a monk's hood, just before MacArthur jumped to Murcheson's
Eye itself.

     And Chris took his fill of the Hooded Man, then moved on aft to get
breakfast, while Kevin mused at his station.

     Why Horst? Horst Staley, who had learned too much on Mote Prime and
died for it, twenty-eight years ago. They could never have met. They
certainly weren't related. Chris Blaine looked like his father, square
face, fine blond hair, tiny Irish nose . . . his father's was broken, of
course . . . whereas Horst Staley had been enlistment-poster handsome,
triangular face, long, heavy muscles, and sloping shoulders.

 

     Horace Bury looked up. "What?'

     Chris Blaine was just coming into earshot; Renner could hear his
voice. He said, "Just a vagrant thought."

     As they approached their stations, Renner heard Trujillo's voice,
cheerful and musical and not quite audible; then Blaine's voice raised
above the hum of the ship's systems. "If you hadn't been digging for
scandal, the high brass wouldn't have heard about the token ships for
years. They look so harmless!"

     "I can't take credit for that. It was the scandal I was after."

     They were both finishing breakfast bars. Joyce Trujillo's assigned
chair was out of the way, with a view of several screens but no
controls. Blaine took his place as copilot. Renner waited a few minutes,
then asked, "Chris, how're we doing?"

     "Seventy hours en route and up to speed. I'll wind down the
thrust"-tap-"now. Then we can drop the external tank and coast till
we're approaching the Jump to the red dwarf. Two hundred seventy hours,
unless the Jump point's moved, in which case all Hell lets out for lunch."

"I'm inclined to keep the tank and refill it. Better safe." Blaine nodded.

     During the next five minutes the thrust dropped from a standard
gravity to .05 gee, just enough to pull spilled liquid out of the air.
Renner waited it out, then said, "Lieutenant, you have the con." And he
went aft for coffee.

     He was unsurprised to find that Bury had floated after him. He
asked, "Turkish?"

     "Please. You have left-left Blaine in charge of my ship. Is that wise?"

     "We're barely beyond Dagda's orbit in New Cal system in free fall,
near as dammit. What could happen? Outies? Helium flash in the motor?
He's Navy trained, you know."

     "Yes."

     "Like me."

     "Yes. Kevin, what was it you didn't want him to overhear? Or was it
the Trujillo woman?"

     "Oh. . . something was nagging at me, irritating me, and I finally
got it. You wouldn't remember Midshipman Horst Staley. He was an
idealized Navy officer, handsome, imposing, the kind you put on posters.
So's Blaine, but he's doing it consciously, like a signal."

     'Yes, after all, he was raised by Moties. What think you now of
Trujillo?"

     "All sex and all business, generally not at the same time. She can
turn it on and off. What are the rules this trip, Horace? Sex or no sex?'

     "Blind eyes, I think. Poor old Trader Bury notices nothing. But she
is staying to business?'

     "Yeah. Projects availability, but. I like it, actually. I like
flirting." Bury did not smile. Renner said, "Give her a break, Horace.
Her dad told her about Traders, merchant princes, but she doesn't know
any. She'll learn about Traders from you."

     "'Your reputation precedes you,'" Bury quoted.

     "I doubt she meant that as viciously as it sounded." Renner sighed.
"It's going to be a fun trip. Trujillo offended you first chance she
got, you hate Blaine, and if everything goes right, we'll get there in
time to find a Motie armada coming out at us."

     In the pause that followed, Renner finished brewing two bulbs of
Turkish. Bury took his and asked, "How can you say that I hate Kevin
Christian Blaine? He is your godson. He is my guest."

     "Horace, you haven't been overtly rude, but I know you. And look,
if I had to ... Igor! Tonight we will make something quite different, quite

     "Yes, Doctor Frankenstein! Yes! Yes!"

     "Tonight we will create the infidel least likely to be welcome
aboard a teeny tiny spacecraft with Trader Horace Bury. We will give him
the following characteristics, hnpf hnpf hnpf! AngloSaxon. Christian. An
Empire Navy man. Related to the same Roderick Blaine who once held Bury
prisoner aboard a Navy warship. And lastly, hnpf hnpf hnpf! He will be
raised by Motie Mediators!"

     Horace dropped the accent, "Lastly, he is a manipulative son of a dog."

     "I'd say that goes with the Motie training.

     "Yes, Kevin, but he tried to manipulate me. Does he think me a fool?'

     "It was not Joyce Trujillo who discovered the significance of the
token ships!'

     "I'll be dipped. Horace, he's chasing her."

     "Eh?"

     "I didn't see it. She's a career woman six years older than he is!
Even so, that's it. He let her see him manipulating you for her benefit.
I wonder if she'll buy it?"

 

     Renner hadn't even decided if he liked her. That was not always the
most interesting question. Perhaps, somewhere in the back of his brain,
he had considered Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo to be his by default. Blaine
was too young, Buckman and Bury were too old, and Kevin Renner was
captain of Sinbad.

     The problem lay in what she might want. Not money, nor entre into
certain levels of society; he could do that. But secrets . . . she loved
secrets, and Kevin Renner's were not his to give away.

     Blaine was too young, and he was a classic model of a Navy man-but
Kevin Christian Blaine had been raised by Motie Mediators. Why was that
so easy to forget? Renner began to watch him.

     Sinbod in free fall could not be spun up. Chris Blaine was used to
a bigger Navy ship. He was clumsy for the first couple of days. So was
Joyce; she had not spent much time in space. Then they got oriented more
or less together. Simultaneously, in fact.

     You had to concentrate to see it, how often they occupied the same
space. In any of the narrow passages they might pass without brushing.
Joyce was still a bit clumsy, but Chris could eel gracefully past her,
close enough to link magnetic fields, but without touching her at all.
Like dancing.

     The morning before Sinbad began deceleration, Joyce Trujillo looked
different, and so did Chris Elaine. They both seemed a bit embarrassed
about it, and they couldn't seem to avoid body contact.

 

     Two centuries ago, Jasper Murcheson had cataloged most of the stars
this side of the Coal Sack. He had numbered them in some haste for his
Murcheson General Catalog, then filled in details at leisure.

     Half those stars were red dwarves, such as this orange-white dot
called MGC-R-31. Murcheson had collected more detail on the hotter
yellow dwarves, those that might have habitable planets and particularly
those that did. MGC-R-31 had a brown dwarf star companion at half a
light-year's distance; Murcheson hadn't even known that much.

     Kevin Renner knew it the moment he popped into the system. He knew
because some unseen nearby mass had skewed his Jump point by several
million miles.

     It should be located, fast. It would move the I-point, too! Buckman
and Renner set to work at once.

     It was good to be in MGC-R-31 system, good to have something to do,
to have an excuse to lock that door.

     A week of Bury's strained good manners and Blaine's and Trujillo's
body-contact formality had been getting on everyone's nerves .. . or
maybe only on Kevin Renner's. Buckman's needs gave him an excuse to do
something about it. Renner had a section of Sinbad's lounge partitioned
off to become Jacob Buckman's laboratory.

     It was cramped for Buckman, very cramped for Buckman and Renner;
visitors were impossible. They preferred using it that way to everyone's
popping in and out of the small bridge compartment. The others tried not
to interfere.

     Search for a brown dwarf. First observe the red dwarf, find its
plane of rotation. By then Buckman had calculated a series of distances
and masses that might account for the shift in the Alderson point. Look
at one locus of points, observe again, calculate again.

     Dinner appeared from somewhere. Renner would have ignored it, but
Buckman hadn't even looked up. Better to eat, and make Buckman eat too.

     And breakfast . . . but by then they were done. Renner sighed in
relief. He opened the door to the lounge and announced, "Nothing. We're
here first."

     "Allah is merciful," Bury said.

     "How sure are you?" Joyce Trujillo asked.

     Chris Blaine said, "Good question. You can't know where the
Alderson point is going to be."

     "I do know that there is no new Alderson point in this region,"
Buckman said. "As to where the incipient point will be, I've had to
change the locus because of the companion. Not much. Brown dwarf stars
don't radiate much. It's still an arc along here, still about a million
klicks long. I moved it by a couple of light minutes. And it isn't there."

     The arc Buckman's cursor made across the screen stretched away from
the orange-white glare of MGC-R-31, toward the Coal Sack and an
off-centered red peephole into Hell: Murcheson's Eye.

     Renner touched a button on the console. "Agamemnon, this is Sinbad.
We get a clean sweep. Do you? Over."

     Agamemnon had popped out a few minutes ahead of Sinbad, separated
by no more than the gap between Earth and Earth's moon. Now they were a
few tens of thousands of miles apart, while Atropos moved ahead toward
the hypothetical I-point. Agamemnon's response came immediately

     "Sinbad this is Agamemnon. Affirmative. I say again, affirmative,
there are no signs of any ships in this system. We are definitely here
first. Is Lieutenant Blaine available?"

     "Right here."

     "Please stand by for the skipper."

"Right."

     "So that's that," Joyce Trujillo said. She was all business now, as
Blaine was all officer.

     "For the moment," Bury said. "They will come. But now-now I believe
Allah has given us this chance. We may yet lose it, but we have the
opportunity."

     'God is merciful," Joyce said. "He will not do everything and thus
take away our free will and that share of glory that belongs to us."

     "Biblical?" Renner asked.

     She laughed. "Niccolo Machiavelli."

     "Arrgh! Joyce, you have done it to me again."

     Buckman said, "Horace? I've listed it as Bury's Infrastar. Your
ship, your crew, your discovery."

     Seconds late, Bury reacted. He smiled with effort and said, "Thank
you, Jacob."

     "Here's the skipper," the comm set announced.

     "Blaine?"

     "Yes, sir. We're all here."

     "Some of my officers are suggesting this is a wild-goose chase."

     "I would like nothing better, Commander," Horace Bury said. "But I
do not believe that."

     "Don't guess I do either. We're wondering what to do next. I don't
mind admitting this isn't a situation I was trained to deal with,"
Balasingham said.

     "Nothing complicated about it," Buckinan said. "Renner has us on a
course to coast along the arc over the next..."

     "Fifteen days."

     "Fifteen days. Your other ships have our data."

     Chris Blaine took over. "Sir, we've sent the data to Atropos, so
he'll take up station ahead of us. The I-point will be in this region. I
suggest that Agamemnon stay behind, that is, between us and the path
back to New Caledonia. Maybe they can intercept. As for us, we make
repeated passes until the I-point appears."

     "All right," Balasingham said. "For now, anyway. The Viceroy's
sending more ships." Short pause. "What if a Motie fleet comes through
shooting?"

     "Then we do what we can," Bury said.

     "And maybe the horse will sing," Renner muttered.

     Bury shrugged. He seemed amazingly calm. "The Moties have no
control over the protostar. This will be as Allah wills, and Allah is
merciful."

 

 

     If Buckman turned off his intercom, as he frequently did, the only
way to find out what he was doing was to bang on his door and risk his
acerbic comments about disturbing his work.

     He had left the compartment door open this morning. Buckman had
been constantly in his laboratory or the adjacent lounge for over thirty
hours. Kevin Renner and Chris Blaine had alternated waiting just outside
the lab door, and it was Chris's turn. He'd been there an hour, with
nothing to do. Then he heard a

shout.

     "By God!"

     Chris went to the compartment door. Buckman was hunched over a
console. His grin was wide

     "What is it?" Chris asked.

     "It's happening."

     Chris didn't ask what. "How far away?'

     "I'm only getting a flux reading. It's not stable yet, but it will
be. It's tremendous! By God! Blaine, this is the best record of a new
Alderson event anyone has ever got! Now we can set up for the visuals.'

     "How far away, Doctor Buckman?"

     Buckman shook his head vigorously. "It's wobbling back and forth!
The new star must be pulsing. It's traversing the arc. Half a million
kilometers of sweep. More. We could conceivably Jump while it passes us,
if it was anything like stable yet."

     "I'll tell the other ships."

     "It's strong enough that even Navy instruments should pick up, but
go ahead." Buckman went back to his console.

     Blaine used the lounge intercom. "Kevin. Buckman says this it. I'll
alert Agamemnon."

     "Agamemnon this is Sinbad. Alderson event detected in our vicinity.
Buckman data attached to this message. Suggest you converge on probable
Alderson point location. I am also sending this message to Atropos. Blaine."

     They waited. Two minutes later the answer came. "Sinbad this is
Agamemnon. We are under way at three gee, I say again, three standard
gravities. We'll move toward you, but I will remain between the I-point
and the exit to New Cal."

     "Doesn't take him long to make decisions," Renner said. "He's about
twenty light-seconds behind us, but he's not going where we are. He can
get to the New Cal Jump point in"-he typed rapidly-about five hours,
starting now. And Atropos is ahead of us. I don't know the best tactics."

     "Depends too much on what comes through," Chris Blaine said crisply.

     "What is it? What's happening?" Joyce eeled out of her cabin,
hurriedly adjusting her clothing. "Moties? They've come through?"

     "Not yet," Blaine said. "They will."

     "Yeah," Renner said. "Dr. Buckman, have things stabilized at all?"

     "Beginning to, yes, Kevin. Do you see how the I-point comes fast
toward us along the arc and slow going back? I expect we're seeing
irregular pulses on the protostar."

     "Yeah. Boom and it settles down, boom and it settles down, boom.
When the protostar stops flaring..."

     "Well, for the next hundred thousand years it won't quite."

     "Eases off, then. The I-point will be ahead of us, won't it? Closer
to Atropos than us, and still wobbling a bit."

     "At a guess, Kevin. This is a first in every way. The collapse of
Buckman's Protostar into Buckman's Star."

 

     "It's all guesses, but give Atropos about four and a half hours. At
one gee we'll take about eight."

     "But you and Buckman don't think we have four hours," Blaine said.

     Renner said, "I know, can't push much more than a gee without
killing Bury."

     "Do not worry about me," Bury said from behind him. "I will be in
my water bed. Nabil is bringing it to the lounge now."

     "One and a half, then. No more," Renner said. "Okay, as soon as you
get in it-

"Stabilized!" Buckman shouted. "How do you know?"

"A ship came through. There's another! A light-second or two apart."

     Renner brought the images up on his screen. "About three
light-seconds ahead of us. Closer to us than Atropos-three ships."
Renner's fingers were dancing. An alarm wheeped; Renner slapped the
volume down. Secure for acceleration. "Four ships. Five."

     Sinbad's motor lit. Objects drifted aft.

     "They're well separated. The star must be still flaring, the
I-point's still drifting."

     "Mercy of Allah," Bury muttered. "Quickly, Nabil, get me into my
water bed'

     "I must secure it to the deck,'' Nabil said calmly. The little old
assassin moved easily under what had become half a gee of pull.

     "Six. Seven," Renner said. "Seven so far. Blaine, you'd better get
Atropos on line."

     "Roger. Doing it."

     "What's happening?" Joyce Mei-Ling demanded from the lounge

     "Secure for acceleration, dammit!" Renner shouted. "All hands,
secure. Nabil, let me know when it's safe!'

     "The bed is secured. If you do not turn too much, I can put him in
it when we are under way"

     "I'll hold it at one gee until you've got him set. Everyone
secure? Buckman, you holding on to something? Here we go."

     Sinbad eased up to one gee. "They're scattering," Renner said.

     "Must have come through with different velocities," Blaine said.
"It's just drift so far.'

     "Sure."

     "They will scatter," Bury said. "Of course they will. Seven ships.
They have been preparing for this for years. Kevin, can we intercept
them all?"

     "Not likely. Moties can't take as much gee stress as we can, but
there's no way three ships can chase down seven. Not given that much
head start."

     "Sinbad this is Agamemnon. What's happening, Blaine?"

     "Seven Motie ships so far," Blaine said. "Beyond us, and drifting
in seven directions. I'll squirt up the data we have." He pressed keys,
and the computer sent out what it had. Data twenty plus seconds
out-of-date would be better than nothing.

     Nearly a minute went by. "Blaine, they'll have plenty of time to
recover from Jump shock before we get there," Balasingham's voice said.
"Assuming each one accelerates along its present course, and giving them
anything like the performance Motie ships had at the blockade point, we
aren't going to catch more than four. Five tops, and that assumes we can
cripple them without too much of a fight, which is assuming a lot.
Damnation-"

     Pause; then Balasingham said, "I think it's time to change tactics.
I'm ordering Atropos to move toward the I-point and prepare to chase
Motie ships. That gets him close to you. I'm taking Agomemnon back to
block the way out of this system. Our entry point won't have changed
enough to matter. We'll never catch them all, but maybe we can bottle
them up in here."

     "Not bloody likely," Blaine muttered. "But I suppose it's the best
thing to try."

     "Captain Renner," Balasingham continued. "You were given sealed
orders when you left New Scotland. To be opened on my instructions. My
orders said to have you do that when the situation got beyond my
control. I hereby instruct you to open those orders.

     "You'll find that your Reserve commission as Captain is activated,
and you're in command of this expedition with the titular rank of
commodore. I don't know what you can do, but I sure can't think of
anything. I'm ordering Commander Rawlins in Atropos to put himself under
your direction.

     "Sir, I am now changing course to guard the Alderson point to New
Caledonia. If you want me to do something else, tell me what it is.
Agamemnon out.'

     "God's navel," Renner said

     "Kevin, have I heard correctly?" Bury demanded.

     "Apparently," Renner said. "I heard it too."

     "Moties," Joyce said from somewhere aft. "Chris-"

     "Later."

     "Yes, but-Chris, they're Moties!'

     "Joyce, it's a great story, but there's no time!" Chris shouted.

"Captain, the first two Motie ships are under acceleration. They must be
automated; Moties wouldn't have recovered yet."

"Wonder what kind of computer they trust to work that soon after a
Jump?" Buckman muttered.

Chris Blaine examined the computer screen. "Continuing in their original
directions. My guess is they'll all do that."

     Renner said, "Scatter and lose us. Only seven ships, and I don't
see any more . . . in fact I've lost one. I'd have thought they would
send more."

     "Me, too," Blaine said. "Maybe they couldn't."

"Spacecraft are expensive," Bury said. He sounded comfortable enough
under 1.5 gravities. "Many resources, of different kinds. A complex society"

     "Which may mean they've got problems," Renner said. "Jacob, where
in the Mote system will their end of the tramline be?"

     "Fairly far out. Well beyond the orbit of their gas giant, Mote Beta."

     'We never looked at the Trojan civilizations," Renner said. "Maybe
we should have."

     Half an hour later it was clear enough. Chris Blaine went back to
explain to Joyce and Bury: "There are seven Motie ships. Five are under
full acceleration in five different directions. One of them is lost, to
us and Agamemnon and everyone else. Maybe we'll find it. Maybe not."

     "Mercy of Allah," Bury muttered. "And the seventh?" "The seventh is
headed directly toward us, Excellency." Bury fingered his beard. "They
will want to talk, then." Joyce Mei-Ling was staring at the viewscreen.
Suddenly she pointed at the Motie ship. As they watched, a laser beam
blinked on and off.

     "As you said, Excellency. If you'll excuse me..." Blaine went back
to his duty station and turned to Renner. "Apparently they want to talk."

     "So do we," Renner said. "We'll never catch any of the others.
Atropos may, but we won't."

     "One of the others looks to be heading for the Jump point to New
Cal," Blaine said. "Agamemnon will be there first, though."

"Meanwhile, that ship is coming to us," Renner said. "Hah. They're
modulating that beam. Let's see if any of it makes sense-"

     "Imperial ship, this is Motie vessel Phidippides," the speaker said.

     "I've heard that name," Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo said.

     "We come in peace. We seek His Excellency Horace Bury. Is he aboard?"

     Joyce said, "Phidippides was the first Marathon runner. Delivered
his message and died."

     Renner and Blaine looked at each other, then at Bury flat in his
water bed with a screen above his face. Renner looked at the sensors
before he spoke. Bury's heartbeat was steady, brain waves indicating he
was fully awake. Okay.

     "Horace? It's for you."

 

 

4 The I Point

 

 

Foreign relations are like human relations. They are endless. The
solution of one problem usually leads to another.

 

-James Reston

 

 

The Honorable Freddy Townsend woke slowly, savoring each moment of
relaxation. He felt eyes on him and turned over. "Hi."

     "Hi, yourself."

     Nobody puts a big bed aboard a racing ship. It only leaves room for
accidents. Freddy had moved the double into Hecate for that earlier
voyage with Glenda Ruth. He'd left it aboard for this trip ... of
course, why not? It had seemed so empty, until now.

     "Chocolate," she said. "Is there any chocolate aboard?"

     You shall have your desire if I have to grow the beans myself,"
Freddy proclaimed.

     If you find any aboard, lock it up. We're likely to need it."

     He stared. Then he reached for her, a tentative gesture. Glenda
Ruth laughed. "I won't vanish, you know."

     "I can barely follow you, and you always know what I'm thinking.
That worries me. If you know so much about people from what the Moties
taught you, what do they know about us? Everything including what we
don't know ourselves?"

     "Maybe not that much," she said.

     "But you're not sure."

     "I only knew three Moties. And they had to be the smartest ones
available. I mean, who would you send as ambassadors to another race? To
an empire that threatened your whole race?"

     "Yeah, you're probably right." This time he took her firmly by the
shoulder and pulled her toward him.

     It would take them six days to cross to the Jump point to MGC R-3 1.

 

     On a later splendid morning Glenda Ruth said, "You should let
Kakumi teach you some fighting techniques."

     Freddy wasn't quite awake yet. He woke slowly and carefully.
"Terry? I don't know that he knows any. Inuit are nice peaceful folk who
really know machines."

     "Taniths aren't. There was three hundred years of tooth and nail.
Terry Kakumi's half Tanith."

     "And maybe five percent Sauron superman, Freddy. He's bound to know
something."

     Freddy sat bolt upright. "Rape my lizard! Kakumi's been my
engineer-Glenda Ruth, how would you know that? You barely know him!"

     "I started watching him because I don't want Jennifer hurt. It
looked like she and Terry were, um, courting."

     "Four years, five, he's kept this ship healthy"

     "He's a good man, Freddy, but I noticed things. I've watched him
move. He tried to cook for us once?"

     'Ugh. I should have warned you. In a race there's just the two of
us. I take precooked. It's better"

     "They were perfect soldiers, the Saurons. March for a week without
sleeping. Tolerate any sunlight level, any gravity. Breathe any
atmosphere, never mind the stench. Sleep anywhere, wake instantly." She
paused. "Eat anything organic. Anything."

     "Oh. I guess that figures. Okay, so he's part-Sauron. There are
Sauron loyalists, you know. Kakumi was six years in the Navy. Honorable
discharge as an engineering petty officer."

     It doesn't matter."

     "Some places it does," Freddy said. "I'm glad they didn't know when
we were racing in the Ekaterina system. I'm glad I didn't know. I'd have
been too nervous."

     "You won, though.'

     "Sure. Didn't know you ... You don't follow racing. Damn, sometimes
you scare me.'

     "Pooh."

     "Yeah, pooh. Let's both take lessons." They'd been in New Cal
system for four days; another six would take them through the Jump point
to MGC-R-31. Six lessons in how to be a Sauron soldier?

"Oh, Freddy, that's..." She stopped.

"You weren't going to say . . ."

     "No, not because I'm a girl and you're a boy! Mediators don't
fight. Sure, let's both take lessons."

 

     Terry Kakumi looked hard and round, a little taller than Glenda
Ruth but more than half again her weight. When Hecate was racing and all
needless mass had been stripped out, he slept in the engine compartment.
Now there were bulkheads installed to make a cabin for him just forward
of the engine compartment, but he hadn't done much with it.

     "Bare as the engine room," Freddy told Glenda Ruth. "I suppose it
makes sense-are you sure about his ancestry?"

     "Want to ask him?"

     "No, I don't think so-"

     "Of course he may not know."

     Freddy tapped on the engine room compartment door.

     It opened. "Aye, aye." Kakumi saw Glenda Ruth, came out into the
companionway, closing the door behind him. "Need me to relieve George on
watch?"

     "No, we're on course. Wanted to ask you something, Terry. You were
Navy, you must have learned how to fight

     Kakumi nodded.

     "Or knew already. Anyway, you knew when we left Sparta we'd be
trying to get to the Mote. Well, it might be dangerous. We're wondering
if you'll give us some lessons?"

     Kakumi looked at Freddy, then Glenda Ruth, and shook his head
slowly. "Wouldn't be a good idea. Four days or so, you'd learn just
enough to get in trouble. If there's trouble, you talk, I'll fight." He
grinned, making small wrinkles at the corners of his eyes. "Better than
if I talk and you fight. Jennifer's good at talking, too. Do we know for
sure if we're going to the Mote?"

     "Not yet."

     "Too bad."

     "Well. I suppose you're right," Freddy said. "About learning just
enough to get killed. All right."

     "Let's go look at the charts," Glenda Ruth said. She took Freddy's
hand and led him away. When they reached the bridge, she was laughing.

     "What?"

     "Think about it. Why he closed the door."

     "Huh? Oh. Jennifer."

     "Interesting that he's that sensitive."

 

     "Excellency, greetings!" The lopsided Motie face bubbled with
enthusiasm . . . somehow.

     "Salaam. I see that you know me."

     "Of course."

     Face had been a new concept to the Moties. Renner remembered that
rigid, twisted smile. Motie faces weren't evolved to send messages. The
creature must be signaling with body language and intonation: Glad, glad
to see you! How long it has been, how much like coming home!

     Bury's indicators were twitchy but not ominously so, "My
Fyunch(click) must be long dead."

     "Oh, yes, but she taught another, and that one taught me. I've been
Fyunch(click) to you since my birth, yet we meet for the first time.
Please tell me, was the coffee-tasting event a success?"

     For an instant, Bury gaped. Then, "Yes, indeed. Your teacher's
teacher was quite right, the Navy had never considered that a man who
doesn't drink wine might still teach them something of discrimination."

     "Splendid! But it must seem that I'm talking of some past Dark Age.
Let me say in some haste that my task is to persuade you and yours not
to fire on us. We come in peace. We carry none of the Warrior class."

     Bury nodded in satisfaction. "Astute of you to say so."

     Renner and Blaine exchanged glances. Chris Blaine grinned slightly.

     "What?" Joyce demanded in a fierce whisper.

     "Warriors," Blaine said. When she raised a questioning eyebrow,
Chris raised a palm to cut her off. "Later."

     The Motie continued to project confidence. "Excellency, our first
ship, which we have named Gandhi, wishes to carry an ambassador to your
nearest peopled world. She is accompanied by a Mediator, of course, one
who can speak to your political authorities. Meanwhile, we aboard
Phidippedes wish to accompany you and yours into Mote system."

     Bury's passengers stared at their alien communicant. Buckman
grinned in anticipation. Joyce scrawled something on her pocket
computer. Renner checked again: only Bury was in camera view. "Buckman,
cut thrust to half a gee," he said.

     "You sure?'

     "We're not chasing anything anymore, and Horace has to talk, and
that was an order

     Bury ignored the byplay. To the Motie he said, "Me and mine?"

     "I was told to invite any ship I found here to follow me home, but
particularly the craft with Horace Hussein Bury aboard."

     Bury's dancing dials had settled; he must feel himself in control
of this situation. "And why should we go with you?"

     "Ah. For you, Excellency, to be here at all is to be aware that
matters have altered. Until today every ship we sent through the Crazy
Eddie point was under sentence of death. We know that none have returned
from that alien country. Today new paths between the stars have opened.
Your battleships can no longer stand between your systems and ours. Will
you not try negotiation instead? Negotiation and trade." The creature
didn't rub its hands together when it mentioned trade, but the
suggestion was there.

     "Perhaps you should speak to our commodore," Bury said. tap of the
button set the camera and monitor screen turning

     Toward Kevin Renner. Kevin said, "Hi."

     "Kevin, hi! I don't remember 'commodore.' Are you actually in
command of that ship?" Just a bit awestruck, she was, with no intention
of showing it. "You've come a long way'

     "Uh-huh. Did another human's Fyunch(click) train you, too, maybe?"

     "I inherit no training from your Fyunch(click), Kevin, but Bury's
Mediator observed other humans. You can't ever know too much about the
people you deal with'

     "And who did I learn that from?"

     Exactly. And how are Spacers Jackson and Weiss, if you know, sir?"

These personality changes were disconcerting. Renner said, "He's
Governor Jackson of Maxroy's Purchase, if you please, and just loving
every bit of it."

     "All right!"

     And Weiss was dead and they both knew it and neither would ever
mention it again.

     Off camera, Chris Blaine made a suggestive throat-cutting gesture.
Joyce looked up from her recorder in alarm. "Keep it talking," she
mouthed soundlessly.

     Renner studied the lopsided visage a bit longer. . . knowing how
little it was gaining him, while the Mediator used these seconds to
study his face. He said, "Make up a name for yourself, for my convenience."

     "Eudoxus."

     Bury smiled thinly; Joyce's eyes narrowed, then popped wide. When
Renner raised an eyebrow, Bury said, "A classical trader and explorer.
Discovered the Golden Wind of the Arabs."

     "Okay. Eudoxus, for the moment I command every Empire ship in this
system. I listen to Horace Bury, so you're talking for his benefit, too.
Now, you've sent seven ships through from the Mote. Some we've captured,
some are running. One has an ambassador aboard, and you want her
transported to where she can contact the Empire. Is that about it?"

     "Two ambassadors, Kevin. She and he. An older Keeper to teach the
younger, younger to last longer."

Keepers: Sterile Masters. "Prudent. You sent no other Classes?"

     "Mediators, of course. And there were working Classes aboard some
ships for maintenance, until the Curdle collapsed. Then we spaced them.
We feared you would feel threatened.

     "However, I have an Engineer pilot aboard, and so does Gandhi." The
creature's left hand came up in haste. Something must have showed in
Renner's face. "She can be spaced if your big ship takes ours in tow."

     "Watchmakers?"

     "Of course. They are very valuable."

     Bury's needles jumped, then settled back.

     "We'll call you back in an hour. Until then   Kevin considered.
"Don't do anything drastic. I'm going to free fall. You match course
with me and then cut your thrust. Keep station ten thousand klicks away.
Can you cause your other ships to gather here?"

     "I can call them, but they will not obey. Three have instructions
to hide within this system." The Motie shrugged. The shoulders didn't
move. "I tell you nothing you would not expect. Let me repeat my offer.
Come with us."

     "I'll call you back." Renner switched off. He closed his eyes tight
and heaved a massive sigh. Then, "Talk to me. Horace?"

     Bury laughed. "How did Eudoxus know that we know of their Warriors?
Answer: she did not. But we might know, and if she did not say, 'We have
no Warriors,' no more would be said at all. We would bend every effort
to destroying every ship, every Warrior Motie." No laughter now. "An
astute analysis, and the correct conclusion, to admit it immediately."

     "Um-humm," Renner said. "I was working on that."

     "Can they know us that well? Already?" Joyce Mei-Ling askedin
wonder. "Kevin-Captain Renner, how did it recognize you?"

     "What else?" Renner asked.

     "She still doesn't know how MacArthur died."

     "Yeah, and you could hardly tell her how the Kaffee Klatch ended,
could you?" Kevin grinned at Joyce's puzzlement. "All right, Joyce.
Eudoxus recognized me because the Moties took pictures of everyone they
met. Made extensive records of what we did, too. Memorizing everything
they know about every human who ever went to the Mote would be part of
Eudoxus's training."

     "Their memories are that good?"

     "At least that good. As to the Kaffee Klatch, the Watchmakers had
reworked MacArthur's coffeepot months after we thought we'd cleaned them
out. They were loose in the tween decks areas, all over the ship, and
when we discovered they were there, they fought us. Before that was
over, MacArthur was abandoned and Horace was ready to exterminate the
Moties. But his Fyunch(elick) never knew any of that."

     "Eudoxus expects to manipulate me. Poor Horace Bury," Bury said
thickly, "he'll risk anything to master the wealth of Motie technology."

     "She knows now, Horace. She saw Kevin twitch when she mentioned
Watchmakers. It may have been a mistake to leave the visuals on. Horace,
I wonder just how much the Moties know about your Arab nationalist
sentiments? Anyway, what shall we do?"

     "An ambassador. Gandhi! Ludicrous."

     "We don't have to blow the Motie ship up, though. Do we?"

     "Perhaps if we could destroy all seven . . . but we can't do that,
Kevin. Consider: what if one of the seven was a decoy, say a token ship
mounted on a small comet head? Poof, gone. Evaporated. We would only
find six, never the seventh. And three have instructions to hide. With a
whole system to hide in. A system we have not explored any better than
they have. Who knows what resources are here? And you may be sure that
those ships have fertile Masters, probably pregnant."

     "Yeah."

     Joyce Trujillo said, "But in that case, if we could find six- Oh."
Kevin noticed the look of annoyance Chris Blaine cast on Joyce Trujillo.
But why ...?

     No time to worry about that. Kevin said, 'Yeah. Six ships, and what
if there's no iceball? Talk or fight, and we can't start shooting until
or unless we find them all, and we've lost at least one already. So
talk, and they want us to go with them to the Mote. That may be a good
idea. The question is, can we leave them here? All of the Mote ships,
with Agamemnon on guard, until more ships from the blockade squadron
come through from the Eye?"

     "Can we not? Consider further," Bury said. "These ships areunarmed.
There has been no hint of a threat, but if one of these does not report
back .

     "The threat is certainly implied, sir," Chris Blaine said. "Look at
the record. The first couple of ships the Crazy Eddie Squadron dealt
with were probably unarmed. The rest had any weapon you can think of.
Excellency, she knew you'd see the threat. With strangers she would have
been more explicit."

     Renner said, "We have to let Eudoxus report back, and we learn more
if we go with her." He got a confirming nod from Bury. "All right,
whether or not Agamemnon is enough, she's all we have, because I don't
fancy taking Sinbad into the Mote system without a reliable way to send
a message out. That means we take Atropos along. Chris, you agree?"

     "Yes, sir. If anyone can get a message out, they can, either
Atropos herself or the longboat."

     Bury asked, "Dr. Buckman, how big are the Motie ships? Tiny, are
they not? Too small to fight Agamemnon, even all together. Yes, and thus
unarmed. So, Kevin, what are you thinking?"

     "I'm thinking Eudoxus could tell us more about what waits for us on
the other side. Then . . . we can maybe rendezvous with Agamemnon, leave
you and Joyce-"

     "Hold up, Commodore Renner-"

     "My ship, curse your hullmetal-thick hide."

     "Okay, okay. Do we want to put the servants off?"

     Bury said, "Each lady so lovely, though all in their forties. Did
you ever wonder why, Kevin? I test them in lesser positions. I send the
weak and timid to other duties. With such companions near me I need
never fear my own people New Levantines would never suspect my harem."

     "Good. They can fight? I was always a little afraid of Cynthia."

     "With reason."

     "We still can't leave. I still can't leave," Renner said. "Not till
we know who's where. Not till things settle down." But Bury was shaking
his head. "What, Horace? Eudoxus didn't seem to be in any hurry."

     "Kevin, in negotiations only a loser reveals that he is under a
deadline. Even so, I think Eudoxus flinched when you cut her off. It's
hard to tell, of course. But do consider what may next emerge from the
I-point if we do not allow Eudoxus to report back."

     "Yeah. Well, we'll wait for her to tell us. Now I need a link to
Atropos. Dr. Buckman, I hereby appoint you communications officer."

     Buckman chuckled. "Navy personality always comes through, doesn't
it? All right, Commodore, I'll try. Incidentally, they're nine
light-seconds away."

 

     "Commander Rawlins here. Balasingham tells me I'm under your
orders, Captain Renner."

     "Such is life. What's your status?"

     "We're chasing down the largest of the Motie ships."

     "How many can you see?"

     "Five. One we're chasing. One is quite openly headed for the New
Cal exit point at top speed, but Agamemnon will be there first. One's
parked near you. Two more are headed off in opposite directions, and
we'll lose at least one of those before we catch up to the one we're
chasing."

     "So we've lost two now. How long until you catch that Motie ship?"

     "I'll be in gunnery range in ten minutes or less. Do I fire?"

     Renner looked to the others on Sinbad's bridge. "Blaine?"

     "Warning shots, sir?"

     Renner activated the mike. "Put a low-power laser dot on them and
see what they do. If they won't stop, blow 'em up."

     "And if they stop?"

     "Stand by," Renner said. "Damnation. Horace, of course they'll
stop. And talk, and talk, and delay."

     "We have already lost track of two. By Commander Rawlins's own
estimation, no matter what he does with the one he chases, he will not
be able to intercept all that will remain. Three will have escaped,
Kevin. Three."

     "Only into this system. That big cruiser can stop their getting
oul," Joyce said. "Can't it?"

     "I remind you, what may come through next could be enough to
destroy Sinbad. Then Atropos. Perhaps Agamemnon."

     "They'll have plenty of time to recover from Jump shock before
engaging," Blaine said. "We've seen ships come through the Crazy Eddie
point that could have slagged Agamemnon in single-ship engagement."

     "Sinbad, this is Atropos. We are closing in range to Motie ship. We
have a beam on her."

     "They'll stop," Blaine said.

     "I am certain you are correct."

"Eudoxus is signaling," Buckman said genially. "Everything happens at
once!" Joyce said. "Sinbad, this is Atropos. As soon as we demonstrated
that we could hit the Motie ship, it turned off its drive and is now
hailing us in Anglic. 'We come in peace. This is the Motie ship King
Peter's Gift. We come in peace. Do you have instructions?' Sir, do we
have instructions?"

"God's navel."

"Suggestion," Blaine said. "Talk to me!"

"Have Atropos put a prize crew on that ship and send it to rendezvous
with Agamemnon. Then he can see if he can chase down anything else."

     "Yeah. Rawlins, put a crew with a bomb onto that Motie shipand send
it to Agamemnon. Then see what you can do about the other Motie ships."

     "Eudoxus is signaling," Buckman said cheerfully.

     "Of course Eudoxus is signaling. Let her wait. Rawlins, I'm
wondering about landings. I'll send you design specs for Sinbad. Horace,
I'm sorry, but he's got to have those. Rawlins, Sinbad can land on a
habitable planet, but we'd have to find fuel to get off. Does Atropos
have landers?"

     "Three. Two cutters and a longboat. All functional, but one cutter
needs work. I'll send you specs. The longboat could carry enough fuel
for a cutter to regain orbit from Mote Prime, but can't get back up
without refueling. Afropos can scoopdive a gas giant planet for fuel."

     What have I forgotten? Oh, I'll get it later. "Buckman, put Eudoxus
on. Hello, Eudoxus, sorry I had to cut you off, but your ships have been
keeping us fairly busy."

     "I was glad of the nap time, Kevin. Have you given further thought
to our invitation?"

     Glad of the nap time, hnpf hnpf hnpf! "Further thought, sure. Nap
time sounds wonderful. We've got to wait anyway. So. Are you short of
anything? Air, food, water? We can lob you a package."

     "Kevin . . . no, we have enough to last us."

     "Okay. Tell me anything about what we can expect to meet uson the
other side of the Jump point."

     "Ye-ess. My Keeper is part of the chain of command of-the name
would not translate, of course, so I will call us the Medina Traders. We
are the largest trading company in our region. We're involved in
dominance games with several other groups, all under truce of one depth
or another. We expect to meet you in space and lead you to our
territory, all in perfect safety. Nevertheless, surprise by a rival
becomes more likely the longer we delay."

     Bury broke in. "Dominance games. War?"

     Renner looked for hesitation, and he saw it. "Nothing so large,
Excellency, but Warriors do become involved from time to time."

     "Battles, then. For what prize? Ourselves?"

     "For resources, thus far. Your existence we have kept to ourselves."

     "So. We might have to fight. What would be your status if you
returned alone?"

     Shrug. "I would have failed. My Keeper and her-superior- would make
decisions on that basis, and so would other clans."

     Renner said, "I'm putting you on hold."

     The picture remained. Buckman said, "We've cut the signal. So?"

     "Keepers?" Joyce asked. "Where have I heard that term?"

     "Keepers are sterile male Masters," Blaine said. "Possessive but
not aggressively expansive. Joyce, the group we dealt with on Mote Prime
was headed by a Master calling itself King Peter-you'll recall one of
these ships they've sent us is called King Peter's Gift?-and the Moties
he sent us included a Keeper ambassador called Ivan . . . Captain? It
feels funny."

     "What?" Renner prompted.

     "King Peter's Gift. It's too bald and not too accurate. That damn
ship isn't a gift, it's a threat. Eudoxus speaks of different factions,
different clans. She spoke of Warriors, but was that really a clever
ploy? Sir, we have to suspect that they really don't know what all the
expedition learned, and may not be part of King Peter's clan at all."

     "Interesting," Bury said. "Of course they know everything I was
told. Or think they do."

     "Decision time," Renner said. "One of the Mote ships has to go
back, but does it have to be Phidippides? Or has Eudoxus learned too
much by watching us? Blaine?"

     "No, sir, trust me on this. She's starting from too far back. She
hasn't been able to interpret anything pointed; she's still correcting
egregious assumptions. At worst she might finally know what destroyed
MacArthur. Is there a strong reason why they shouldn't know that?"

     "I don't know. Let's just say we'll keep all our secrets until
wehave a reason to give them up."

     "Sounds right, sir. And of course we confirmed that we knowabout
the Warrior class. Pity, but at least there won't be any more of the
'harmless Moties' game they played on my father."

     "Yeah. Warriors. Horace, if there's anything I don't know about
Sinbad's defenses, tell me privately, before we jump."

     "Yes. Eudoxus is becoming nervous, Kevin."

     "Yeah. So she's worried that things are coming unraveled at the
other end. That's probably not good for us. It means we can ask for
concessions, though, because she won't have time to dicker. What do we
want from Eudoxus?"

     Bury's eyes half-closed. "Yes. If we knew-"

     "Atropos calling," Buckman said. "They've got a second ship. Middie
going aboard with a bomb. The first prize crew reports that an Engineer
reworked the air System to give them air to breathe. All very
cooperative. Rawlins has a third ship at the edge of detection range,
but it's deep in the asteroids and decelerating. He's sure it's already
too late."

     "Tell him to leave it alone. Ladies and gentlemen, do we go? Yeah,
Joyce, I know. Blaine?"

     "Go."

     "Horace?"

     "Go, of course, but something must be done first."

     "Name it."

     "We need trade goods. Specifically the magic worm that we presume
Glenda Ruth Blaine is bringing."

     "Bury, we can't wait for that!" Renner said.

     "I do not propose to. I do say that you must order the Navy not to
hinder Miss Blaine when she arrives in this system. If she thinks it
best to come to the Mote system-and she will, will she not, after your
message to her, Lieutenant?"

     "Yes, of course."

     "Then the Navy must not prevent her."

     "They're going to think it odd," Renner said. "A lord's daughter
going into a combat zone. Okay, I can leave those orders. Anything else?
. . . All right. Buckman, do we go?"

     "Certainly. I can get a second view of a protostar in process of
collapse! Maybe they'll let me leave instruments."

     Kevin Renner nibbled his forefingers for a moment. "It'd be nice to
refuel first . . . ah, well. Put Atropos through."

"Sir?"

     "Rawlins, we're going through to Mote system. You're going first.
How much fuel have you burned up?"

     "I've got half a tank. Enough to get anywhere if we don't have to
fight. Sir."

     "We're expecting to be met by friends, but it's not certain at all.
Battle stations. Prepare your ship, full sleep period included and I am
dead serious, and then call me. Sinbad out." With his eyes closed Renner
said, "Somebody check on dinner."

 

 

     Will Rawlins turned to his executive officer. "General Quarters, Hank."

     "Aye, aye." Horns sounded through Atropos. "What do you think we'll
find?"

     "God knows. Get me Balasingham, please. Maybe he'll have an idea."

     "Not likely," Henry Parthenio said. "But what the hell. Here he is.''

     Baiasingham was under three gravities and looked it. "Go ahead, Will."

     'Sir, Captain Renner wants me to accompany him into the Mote system."

     "Yeah. Have fun."

     "You think it's a good idea, sir?"

     "I haven't the faintest flipping notion of whether it's a good
idea," Balasingham said. His voice came from deep in his chest as he
fought the strain of high gravity. 'What I do know is that he's the boss
now."

     "Yes, sir-a Reservist, pilot to an Imperial Trader..." Rawlins's
tone said it all: the Navy did not like Traders and never had, and-
"Will, Captain Renner has been to the Mote. A long time ago, but he's
been there, and that's more than I can say for anyone else we know. Now
switch off your recorder and make sure we're secure. Got it?. . . Okay.
Bury and Renner have been Navy Intelligence for a long time, and Bury
comes to this system with the personal recommendation of Lord Roderick
Blaine. Will, they're the best people we've got for this job."

     "We-ell, all right, sir. Okay, I'm sending two Motie ships with
prize crews to rendezvous with you at the exit point. They're under way
now, so there's nothing keeping me. I'll take formation with Sinbad and
the Motie ship Phidippides, and I reckon we'll be going through when
I've done that. God knows when I'll be back."

     "Right. Remember your first duty is to get The Word out. Godspeed."

     "Thank you, sir. Sir, can we stop them?"

     "God knows, Commander. You've seen some of the ships they've sent
out of the Mote, and from all we know they've had decades to prepare for
this. They could have a whole fleet of dreadnoughts just waiting for
orders."

     "Ugh. Yeah. Okay, here we go." Rawlins turned to his bridge crew.
"Let's do it. Hank, get us into place to enter Mote system. Phidippides,
then Atropos, then Sinbad."

 

 

5 The Battle of Crazy Eddie's Sister

 

 

To delight in war is a merit in the soldier, a dangerous quality in the
captain, and a positive crime in the statesman

 

-George Santayana

 

 

A brown blur swept past his eyes, too close; came wobbling back, taking
on definition. Arm, fingers; fingers searching, closing on his shoulder,
a nose nearly touching his. "Kevin. Captain. We." Joyce Trujillo
blinking, trying to work her mouth. "We're being shot. At."

     Cameras had been pulled inside for the Jump. Through the viewport
Kevin saw murky red light where he should have seen black. Enemy lasers
must be bathing Sinbad's Langston Field. No hot spots.

     "Yeah. Okay. Field's holding. You . . . recover quick. . . Joyce."
Renner looked around. His head wanted to swivel too far. Buckman was
cursing as he tried to get his fingers working, to poke a camera through
the Field. Blaine's arms jerked as he tried to bring them to his
instruments. Horace Bury was contemplating nirvana with vacant eyes and
a trace of a smile.

     His doctors had finally got through to him. Stroke, heart failure,
ulcers, ruined digestion, and you won't be through it a moment sooner.
Don't fight Jump shock!

     "Got prr. Probe," Buckman said. A picture appeared in Renner's
monitor, and wobbled, and hunted, and found a green glare. "There. One
ship using lasers only. Who's gunnery officer?"

     "Me." Renner couldn't trust Blaine to kill. Navy trained, but
raised by Mediators. Blaine wasn't functional anyway, not even as much
as Trujillo. And Sinbad didn't have much for guns: a signaling laser
that was several thousand times more powerful than it needed to be, good
enough to keep armed merchantmen at bay, nowhere near enough power to be
useful against real warships.

     How hardened a target was the enemy ship? Would it be worth firing
back? And where was Atropos? Sinbad had gone through last. It should be
Rawlins's job to protect Sinbad.

     The green glare wavered. Lost focus. Now it was a green point
ringed in red, a yellow-white halo, glare green and expanding, an
inflating violet sphere, poof, gone in seconds.

     And with that enemy gone, the sky cleared.

     It was a birthday-party sky, a black starfield full of colored
halloons linked by bright strings. Sinbad had fallen into a battle.
Ships must number in the hundreds. No telling how many sides, or who was
who. But Sinbad's Field was murky red and darkening, shedding stored
energy and no longer under attack.

     "Buckman, get an antenna through that!"

     "Done. We've got ships in all directions . . not so many toward the
Mote . . . I think I see Atropos."

     An orange blob, close, cooling .. . darkening to red, but not
contracting. Definitely Atropos. The Moties' expanding Langston Field
had revolutionized Empire warfare; but Atropos had been built for duty
at the Eye, where an expanding Field only meant more surface area to
absorb heat from the star.

     "I have Atropos on the line."

     Good. Rawlins, what's your situation?"

     Stable. We were attacked the moment we came through, Captain
Renner. Two fleets, one that shoots at us, one that shoots at the other
fleet.

     "When the Motie embassy ship, Phidippides, came through, one fleet
started shooting at her. I moved in front of her and shot back. When I
did, everyone else got in the act."

     "How's Phidippides?"

     "That's her on the other side of us, with an expanding Field,
yellow and getting worse. The one that's not shooting back. Now that
we're in front of her it's not critical unless they're hit by torpedoes."

     "Can you protect them?"

     "Yes, sir. We can't talk to the other fleet, but they cooperate.
Between us we slagged one of the enemy just after you came through.
Commodore, we haven't seen torpedoes yet, just lasers and particle
beams. We're in a general fleet engagement, but beyond watching over you
and the Motie ship I don't know the objective. It's all guns, all the
ships have expanding Fields-"

     "Sinbad, this is Phidippides. Are you unhurt?"

     The Motie was speaking in Horace Bury's voice, blurred by noise,
probably still affected by Jump shock despite having gone through well
before Sinbad. Renner grimaced. He said, "Carry on, Commander Rawlins.
You're doing fine. I'll try to get information."

     It was pointless to remind the Moties that the passage was supposed
to be safe. "Eudoxus, this is Renner. Who's shooting at us?"

     Static made a ragged silhouette of the Motie shape. "Call them
Ghengis Khan and the Mongol Horde. They're bandits, a large,
well-established group. We were under attack from the Khanate when the
Crazy Eddie point moved, but we thought they were after our comet."

     "Comet, Eudoxus?"

     "Resources, Kevin. We moved a comet out of the Waste to feed the
industrial needs of Medina's monitoring fleet at the new Jump point we
were expecting. Dammit, most of them are protecting the comet-"

     "Speed it up, Eudoxus. Who are we fighting? Do we have allies? How
do we recognize them? How safe are you? You can't fight."

     "Protection is coming. Don't try to fight, Kevin. I will lead you
away to our base, to safety. Medina's Warriors are moving to protect us
now. They'll guard our withdrawal."

     Renner saw it quite suddenly. "You're not from Mote Prime at all."

     "No, no, no." the Motie said immediately. "On Mote Prime they've
blasted themselves back to the invention of the brick. Medina Trading is
at present based in the Oort Cloud, with allies in the Mote Beta moons
and other regions. We've been using that wonderful protection field of
yours to scoop up mass and debris, but a comet is better

     The pattern of distant ships was changing . . . had been changing
for some time. Brilliant points and larger colored dots, ships under
attack and ships not under attack, several hundreds of them, were
converging into place between Sinbad's position and the main congestion
of warships. Phidippides's Field was cooling, shrinking, as her allies
destroyed the ships that were attacking her.

     It wasn't easy to see what they were doing, until you remembered
the lightspeed gap. Even the nearest ships hadn't been seen to move for
the first half-minute. The battle must be scattered up to three or four
light-minutes across, tens of millions of klicks. They were all . . .
no, only the nearby ships were reacting to the sudden appearance of
three ships in the new Jump point. Some had moved to protect Phidippides
and the Empire ships she escorted; some to attack. But far beyond, other
glare-white sparks swarmed around the cold white glow of a comet's tail.

     It was war among the asteroid civilizations for possession of the
I-point, the Jump point into Empire space. Kevin Renner had led them
right into it. Asteroid civilizations . . . and all his preparations had
been made for Mote Prime!

     Bloody Hell! Renner raged at himself. He couldn't even claim he'd
been lied to, though of course he had. And now he was being told to run
.. . but without knowing who was who, how could he argue?

     "Stand by," Renner said curtly. "Rawlins?"

     "Sir?"

     "You're better at analyzing battles than I am. Is there any way we
can get a message back to Agamemnan?"

     "No, sir. The longboat wouldn't have any chance to get back to the
I-point, and Atropos wouldn't have much more. None unless we could
coordinate with the Motie fleet that's not shooting at us."

     "Thanks. That won't happen. Okay, follow us and watch our backs.
We're not going to Mote Prime. We're headed for the comets, outbound
from the sun. I'll send the course when I have it."

     "Sir-"

     "Rawlins, when I know more, you will! Now I have to talk to the
Moties. Out."

     "No rest for the wicked," Joyce said.

     Renner grinned slightly and hit the control keys. "Eudoxus."

     "Here, Kevin."

     Bury smiled softly, but said nothing.

     "There may be another ship coming through anytime in the next five
hundred hours," Renner said. "A very valuable ship. With a"-he saw Chris
Blaine easing into place off camera-"a human female Mediator aboard. Be
sure your people bring that ship to us when it comes."

     "We'll try."

     "Do more than try. The ship is valuable, and two of the passengers
are Imperial aristocracy. Influential. Very influential."

     "Ah. I will convey the urgency of the request."

     "Good. Now, where are you taking us?"

     "Medina Trading is among the nearer comets, above the plane of the
Mote planetary system. There is an intermediate base, closer, well
defended. We'll go direct to Medina Home unless we're interrupted, but
on a course that lets us get to the base at need. Here is your course
vector   

     Renner examined it. "About twenty-five hours to turnover at
something near one and a half standard gee. Everybody okay on that?"

     "It is better than being caught in a battle," Bury said.

     Renner glanced at the telltales, then caught Nabil's eyes. Nabil
nodded slightly.

     "Fair enough. Lead off," Renner said.

     Chris looked okay; so did Alysia. Bury was fully alert and mad as
hell. Good; Renner could use their opinions. He said, "Buckman, I need
Atropos, but maintain the link to Phidippides. I'm sounding acceleration
warning."

     He let Sinbad's corridors turn raucous while he ran the thrust up
to one gee. Nabil and Cynthia hovered around Bury like worker ants
feeding a queen. Bury's medical monitors were drawing a forest of
needles, but why wouldn't they? Horace Bury hadn't been shot at since

     The Outies at Pierrot? Rape my lizard, was it that long ago? And
Blaine and Trujillo were staying well clear of each other's privacy
bubbles, and neither was saying anything. There may not be as much help
there as I thought.

     Phidippides was easing away at a gee and a half, almost twoMote
gravities. Renner ran his thrust up to match.

     Atropos was aglow, black to glare green in a few seconds. The Motie
ships looked tiny compared to the empire cruiser, but they had expanding
Fields and Atropos didn't. Not good . . . but somewhere behind them a
red point blossomed into a violet sun and dissipated. Atropos began to
cool. Rawlins was fast with his guns.

     The battle was mostly behind them now. Friendly and enemy ships
looked too much alike; in the telescopes each was unique; but one
squadron was definitely deploying to form a barrier behind the three
fleeing ships. Another group converged on a ship trying to get past the
barrier force.

     Renner sighed. Until he knew more, what the hell else could he do
but run? He made eye contact with Chris Blaine: Do you see anything I don't?

     Blaine shook his head and pointed to the battle screen. "Rawlins is
right, it's unlikely we'd get a message back to Agamemnon even with help
from Medina's fleet, and without Atropos we're in big trouble. Other
than that, we're fine. Rawlins knows how to fight, and whoever our
allies are, they're pretty good. And willing to take punishment for us."

     "They'll be Warriors," Renner said. Nightmare creatures like those
statuettes in the Moties' Time Machine sculpture, perhaps altered by
selective breeding for life in low gravity. Warriors on both sides.

     "Horace?"

     "I think of nothing you have not. I feel as if I have deceived myself."

     "Which you did," Buckman said, chuckling.

     Mote Beta?" Joyce asked.

     We called the main Mote planet Mote Prime," Renner said."There's a
gas giant we called Beta."

     And almost certainly another planet," Buckman said. "Mote Gamma.
Almost certainly a gas giant. There are also two large clusters of
asteroids sharing the orbit of Mote Beta. Nearly all of them were moved
into place."

     "Moved," Joyce said. "Isn't that a lot of work, moving asteroids?"

     "Sure is," Renner said. "Enough. We're committed."

     "Alea jacta est," Joyce said

     "Onk?"

     "The die is cast," Bury translated. "Indeed.

     "Right. Okay, mike's live again. All right, Eudoxus," Renner said.
"Keep talking. What in Hell is a Bury's Fyunch(click) doing in the Mote
asteroids?"

 

 

     Freddy Townsend woke when Kakumi's voice barked at him from the
intercom. He woke quickly as he always did when he slept at the bridge
console.

"Freddy, there's a radio message. General communications band. Talk to
them, Freddy. You there?"

     Freddy reached tentatively for the console. The timer showed nearly
an hour since the shift. His hand was steady, and his head felt clear.
He flipped a switch to put the incoming message on the speakers:

 

"WARNING. YOU HAVE ENTERED AN INTERDICT ZONE. THIS SYSTEM HAS BEEN
PLACED UNDER INTERDICT BY AUTHORITY OF THE VICEROY GOVERNOR GENERAL OF
TRANS-COAL SACK SECTOR! THIS SYSTEM IS PATROLLED BY THE IMPERIAL NAVY.
BROADCAST YOUR LOCATION MJD IDENTITY ON THIS BAND AND WAIT FOR
INSTRUCTIONS, FAILURE TO COMPLY MAY RESULT IN DESTRUCTION OF YOUR SHIP.
WARNING."

 

     "Well, that's pretty explicit," Freddy said. He typed quickly on
the control console. "Glenda Ruth, I think you should include something
in your code so they can be sure its you. That message wasn't friendly
at all."

     "All right." She connected the interface cable into her computer
and scribbled. "Clementine, code that with my private key."

 

     "Yes, dear."

 

     "I wonder about this," Glenda Ruth said. "That message sounds
pretty positive."

     "You think something has happened?"

"I don't know, but I bet we don't have long to wait." The reply came
four minutes later:

 

HECATE THIS IS INSS AGAMEMNON, REQUEST YOU RENDEZVOUS

WITH US IMMEDIATELY. VECTORS FOLLOW. WE HAVE MESSAGES

FOR THE HON. GLENDA RUTH FOWLER ELAINE. BALASINGHAM."

 

Freddy's fingers played. She'd seen him more tense, his fingers moving
faster, during a Sauron Menace game . . . when the penalties for
mistakes weren't so high. "Not far. We can be there in ten minutes.
Glenda Ruth, I can't find a blinker'

"A what?'

     "Normally they'd give us a laser spot to follow. This close, with
lOOx mag, I should see something that big directly . . . unless the
Langston Field is up. Nice that we were expected, though. And it's a
request, at least so far."

     "They've gone stealth," Glenda Ruth said. "And no comment regarding
Sinbad or my brother. Freddy, I think it's happened. The Moties are loose."

     "Uh-huh." He tapped at console keys. "ACCELERATION WARNING.Stand by
for half-standard gravity."

 

 

     "The Fyunch(click)s of humans were very diverse," Eudoxus said,
"and so were their various fates. Captain Roderick Elaine's went mad.
Sally Fowler's remained sane enough to advise, but was rarely considered
trustworthy. Jacob Buckman's never had a problem. Chaplain Hardy's
played abstract intellectual games; even some of the Masters found them
interesting. Kevin, yours won so many arguments that she was made a
teacher, but always under supervision'

     "Flattering," Renner said. "Did you meet her?"

     "No. I know these things due to observations by Horace Bury's
Fyunch(click). That individual-shall we call her Bury-One? She was
young, male, when he studied Horace Bury."

     "After MacArthur's departure he saw a ruinous war shaping itself.
He made some efforts to avert it, then to shape any kind of refuge for
knowledge that would be lost. When these attempts had clearly failed,
Bury-One left her Master. With a tangle of alliances and bluffs
collapsing about her, she built and provisioned a spacecraft, reached
the asteroids, and announced that her services were for sale

     Eudoxus waited patiently through Kevin Renner's laughter. Others
were laughing, too, and even Bury was smiling in . . . pride?

     Presently Renner said, "I take it your Medina Trading-"

     "No, Kevin, Medina hadn't the wealth or position by then.
Acivilization we will call Byzantium won the bidding among those who
could not be driven off or barred by distance or shortfall of delta-vee."

     Chris Blaine was listening patiently, taking it all in and giving
nothing. Joyce huddled in one corner of the bridge, whispering
frantically into her recorder. Bury was smiling, enjoying Kevin's
discomfiture. Bury had played this game before.

     None of Renner's crew were going to be any help at all unless one
of Cynthia's agonizing massages could put him back together, sometime in
the indefinite future.

     Byzantium? Renner rubbed his aching temples and considered ordering
Atropos to blow Phidippides out of the sky. At least he'd know who his
enemies were then. And the next alien who tried to parley might feel
impelled to give him more information.

     Some of this may have showed even through static, to a trained
Mediator. Eudoxus said, "Please, Kevin, let me try to give you some
picture of the extraplanetary civilizations."

     "Try it."

     "On Mote Prime they tend to big, sprawling cultures," Eudoxus said.
"They use more intricate interlockings of obligations, bigger and more
extensive families controlling wider, better-defined territories than we
do. We don't go near Mote Prime. The planetbound are too powerful, and
also not mobile enough to threaten us.

     "In the asteroids and the moon clusters of Mote Beta and Mote Gamma-"

     "Gamma," Euckman said. "So it does exist. A gas giant?"

     "Yes, approximately twice the distance from the Mote as Mote Beta.
It has an extensive system of moons. In those and Beta's moons the
families are small, independent, and not inclined to trust outsiders to
supply needed resources."

     "Any idea why?"

     "We can't make maps out here. There's no way to define a territory.
Everything changes shape constantly. Trade routes depend on fuel
expenditure, on position and energy considerations, and both are
constantly shifting. Your Alderson Field has made it even more complex,
because now even the waste areas may yield mass."

     "I was going to ask, who is Byzantium? But rape that. Who are you?"

     "Medina Traders. Byzantium is an ally.'

     "Yeah."

     "An important ally. When MacArthur arrived in our system nearly
twenty-seven Mote Prime years ago, Medina Traders was a family of . .
how to describe? . . . well, twenty to thirty Masters and equivalent
subgroups, perhaps two hundred of every class excluding Watchmakers. Our
position in Mote Beta's Trailing Trojans was gradually slipping. The
geometrical relationship of the various rocks had gone through some
crucial changes. Our lore included detailed knowledge of failed
investigations of the Crazy Eddie Drive, and also of the Curdle in the
Coal Sack. We recognized your ships for what they were, from your
appearance in the Crazy Eddie point right down to the black-box glow of
your Langston Fields."

     "I expect you weren't born yet." Any Mediator alive then would be
dead by now.

     "Oh, no. I was taught these things because His Excellency would
insist on knowing the flow of our politics. Kevin, may I talk to His
Excellency?"

     "For the moment, no." The Mediator would have more trouble reading
Renner's thoughts and emotions. Bury, of course, was watching the
monitor; he could interrupt if he saw need.

     The Motie nodded brusquely. "The advent of interstellar aliens
changed everything. We retreated from our position in the Trailing
Trojans in good order. Medina lost considerable valuable resources, but
we were able to hold on to some by going before there was need. The
usurper family, call them Persia, were as eager as we were to avoid
noisy space battles that might attract Lenin's attention. We may call
this Period One, from the Empire's arrival to Lenin's departure.

     My Master established us in the inner halo of comets, beyond both
the old and the expected new Crazy Eddie points. She had a gripping hand
on considerable territory when she died, a vast volume enclosing little
mass, near to nothing valuable at all. But in thirty years we would be
just outward from the access point to the human-ruled Empire. You
follow? We would command Crazy Eddie's Sister when the Curdle collapsed
and the Sister appeared.

     'Resources are thin where we settled. During the twelve years
following Lenin's departure, we did well. Call that Period Two. We were
able to expand Medina's base due to alliances formed with Byzantium in
the moon system of Mote Beta. We shared our knowledge with Byzantium.
The family Byzantium is large and powerful and can afford what she sends
us, even though half of the resources they send go to support Medina
Traders and to increase our strength. Of course they expect to share in
the rewards, once our way opens to the worlds of the Empire."

     "When Horace Bury's Fyunch(click) appeared, Byzantium was able to
block other competitors and acquire her. This worked out well for us.
With Bury-One to advise them, Byzantium felt more secure in our
partnership."

     Bury was nodding, smiling. Politics. Eudoxus continued, "Medina
Trading spent Period Two sending ships to test the strength of the
Empire's defense of the Eye. All the tricky stunts tried in that period
were of our working, using resources that flowed from Byzantium."

     "From what we saw, that was a lot of resources," Renner said.

     "Indeed," Eudoxus said. "A great deal of wealth was lost forever."
The alien conveyed sorrow and resignation. "So. We agitated for a Bury's
Motie, but many years passed before Byzantium would release one to us.
He was Bury-One's first apprentice. Of course Bury-One was already
training a second, and the first began at once to train me. Call her
Bury-2A, my teacher."

     "I don't see where the fighting comes in yet."

     "Am I to feel hurried, Kevin? You'll be two hundred hours en route.
We don't intend to keep this acceleration any longer than we have to."

     "Two hundred hours . . . okay. I'd like Sinbad and Atropos refueled
as soon as we arrive."

     "I'll pass the word. We will do other things for you, too."

     "The war."

     "Yes. Certain power structures in the Mote Gamma clusters- East
India Company, Grenada, the Khanate-watched us build ships, move them
into finicky position, make them disappear forever; we even armed and
launched a comet that way. Wasn't that why some ancient comic named it
the Crazy Eddie point? These pirates coveted what we were destroying in
what must have appeared to be a form of potlatch. They thought they must
have better use for such vast wealth."

     "Potlatch?" Renner said. "A Motie word?'

     Joyce stage-whispered, "Human. American Indian. Conspicuous
consumption. Humiliate your enemies by destroying your own wealth."

     Renner nodded. "Mote Gamma. Eudoxus, we didn't know about a Mote
Gamma."

     "As I said." The Motie was all unhurried patience now. A gasball
planet, three times the mass of Mote Prime, twice as far from the Mote
as the greater gasball you've named Mote Beta. Gamma is much smaller,
with two big moons and some gravel, all chewed to death by a million
years of mining. I'll send you the mass-" The picture went dark with a snap.

     Renner said, "Buckman? What?"

     "It just cut off. Maybe she doesn't want to answer," Buckman said.

     "No, she's under attack." Lieutenant Blaine pointed out a score of
stars blazing dangerously bright. "That's good targeting. The enemy's a
good quarter AU behind us. Sinbod can't shoot back, Captain."

     "Not at that range. We've got the overpowered signal laser. A
glance at Bury: had he held anything back? "And the finger, and they're
way out of range for either of those."

     The light wavered. It wasn't getting brighter. Probably a whole
cluster of enemy ships was firing . . . and if those lasers were free to
converge on distant Phidippides, then Medina's fleet must no longer be a
threat.

     Phidippides's drifting star thrust sideways; drifted behind Atropos.

Now Atropos became dark red, then cherry red, while Phidippidos cooled.

     "Phidippides calling," Buckman said.

     Good. Eudoxus, what's your status?"

     "Temperature down. Can your warship handle the flux?"

     "Sure, Atropos has more mass and bigger accumulators than you do .
. . and the enemy's breaking off. But dammit, there aren't any of your
forces left at the comet, are there?"

     Eudoxus shuddered. "Comet! We abandoned the comet as soon as you
appeared. What need, when we had Crazy Eddie's Sister to find and
protect? Let the Khanate have it. But a splinter group formerly
belonging to the Khanate has virtually destroyed our main fleet and now
holds the Sister

     "Call them the Crimean Tartars, for the moment. They're new to us.
The Crimeans hold the new Jump point to the red dwarf, and there's
reason to think they know what they have. They'll be hard to dislodge'

     Blaine was radiating distress. Renner said, "If they're there when
Glenda Ruth comes through, we will all regret it."

     "I will inform Medina's Warriors. After that it is out of my hands.
Give me a moment."

     The picture went dark. Kevin Renner clicked off, then turned to his
people. "Horace? Anything? I don't even have intelligent questions. It's
frustrating."

     "Kevin, I have a thousand questions, but none are urgent. You will
note the selection of names for the various groups. All from classic
history, all having one way or another impacted on Arab civilization,
some like the Khanate quite devastatingly. It is cleverly done."

     "Eudoxus fully understands Hecate's importance," Chris Blaine said.
"It's still worth remembering, Mediators don't do war. I'm not sure what
they'll do now that their fleet is knocked out. Send an embassy group,
probably including one trained by Eudoxus...hmm."

     "What?"

     "It seems probable that the Tartars will capture Hecate," Blaine said.

     "You're calm enough about it," Joyce said.

     Blaine shrugged without quite using his shoulders. "It's a problem
that needs fixing, Joyce, not a bloody funeral. Yet."

     "There's certainly nothing we can do about it," Renner said. "We're
headed away from the Sister at high acceleration, and our friends don't
have any ships left. So what happens?"

     Blaine shrugged. "So the Tartars will take possession of Hecate.
Medina will send Mediators, one of whom probably knows Anglic. We might
be able to get a message to Glenda Ruth. At least tell- yes. Captain,
assuming that the Tartars will not allow Eudoxus's friends to brief
Glenda Ruth, have Eudoxus instruct his Anglicspeaking Mediator to use
the expression 'rape my lizard'. Either in Glenda Ruth's hearing, or as
an expression she will be asked to explain."

     "What in the world ...?" Renner demanded.

     "It is recent slang, not used before this generation."

     "Ah," Bury said. "Miss Blaine will know that the Moties never
learned to say that from the MacArthur-Lenin expedition, therefore that
this is a message from us. Subtle, Lieutenant. My congratulations."

     "Thank you," Chris said.

     "What else?" Renner asked. "What use can we make of the Crazy Eddie
Worm?"

     "What's that?" Joyce asked.

     "Later," Chris Blaine said. "I don't know, Captain. Glenda Ruth may
think of something. She thinks more like a Motie than I do and she's
seen it."

     "Allah is merciful," Bury said. "But He expects us to use His gifts
wisely. Lieutenant, where did Eudoxus learn about the protostar's
future? I am certain my Fyunch(click) knew nothing of it."

     "Not when you knew him," Blaine said. "Later..."

     "Perhaps so. But perhaps very much later," Bury said. "Perhaps not
until leaving the service of Byzantium. I need not tell you there are
complexities here."

     "Yeah, you must love it," Renner said.

 

 

     Medina Trading's main base was a billion kilometers from the light
and warmth of the Mote, and ten degrees up from the plane of Mote
system. It was at the inner edge of the cold and emptiness that lie
beyond the farthest planets: the inner cometary halo. Medina's Master
could hold such a domain because there was so little of value. But
Medina Trading needed a base nearer where the Sister would form.

But matter closer to the Mote moves in faster orbits.

     In the thirty years since Empire ships appeared in Mote system,
Medina Trading had claimed six comets as temporary bases.

     Claim a comet; build defenses and a mining operation. Pressure
domes would expand to become homes. Finished products would arrive from
Medina Main Base: food, metals, technology for working hydrogen,
energy-shield generators, in exchange for spheroids of refined hydrogen
ice. Some of Byzantium's tribute to Medina would be diverted to the
inner base, and that could include power in the form of a collimated
sunbeam. The base would house Watchmakers and Engineers, many ships, a
few Warriors, more Masters, and always, at least one pair of Mediators.
More would be better.

     Before the base could drift so far from Crazy Eddie's unborn Sister
as to be useless, the comet would be mined almost to nothing. Medina
would claim another.

     Ten years ago East India Company won the battle for the Crazy Eddie
point. Medina's Master had been forced to make them a partner... but
hardly an equal partner. East India Company used its own wealth to test
the Crazy Eddie point, while they watched for the Sister in the wrong
place. But they also demanded representation at Inner Base Five and,
later, Six. Unwanted representatives to be housed at Medina's expense, a
family and entourage of spies.

     Therefore Inner Base Six became a peaceful industrial installation
with a secondary purpose; eventual contact with the Empire through Crazy
Eddie's Sister. Dozens of spacecraft were always about. These were
harmless mining and transport ships, weaponless, with big bubble cabins.
The Sister might open at any time, and then these ships must carry
Mediators to meet the Empire of Man. Base Six's Master kept Mediators
ready at all times; so did the East India presence.

But contingency plans were made that East India Company wasto know
nothing of.

 

 

6 Hostile Takeover

 

 

Power consists in one's capacity to link his wilt with the purpose of
others, to lead by reason and a gift of cooperation.

-Woodrow Wilson

 

 

     The great black blot must be Agamemnon. It was twenty klicks away
and dritting closer, dead slow. Three much smaller ships were clustered
nearby. Freddy expanded the view

     "Alien," he said.

     "Moties," Jennifer Banda said. Her grin was enormous, red mouth and
white teeth in a dark face lit only by starlight from the viewport.
"Glenda Ruth, they look like the ships your father saw. At least, that
one does. Those others

     That one had a crude look. Most of it was a spherical tank.
Forward, a smaller, more elaborate container (a cabin?) bristled with
sensors; ii looked as if it could detach. Aft was a fat doughnut and a
spine like a long, long stinger, a magnetic guide for a fusion 11am e

     A second had a similar spherical tank and a smaller cabin, plus a
tube that might be a cargo hold. A third was all tori and looked as if
it would spin for gravity, but was attached to a round bottomed cone...,
a lander?

     "All different," Glenda Ruth said.

     "Will the Navy let us talk to them'?" Jennifer asked.

     "I don't see why not,' Freddy said.

     "HECATE THIS IS AGAMEMNON, OVER.'

     "Frederick Townsend here. Centering communications beam. Locked on.
Over

     "Locked on. I'm Commander Gregory Balasingham, Mr. Townsend."

     "I take it the Moties have got loose," Freddy said.

     "I wouldn't put it that way. There's a new Alderson path from this
system to the Mote, but no Motie ships have got past us here."

     "So far as you know," Glenda Ruth said.

 

     "I see three ships of three radically different designs," Glenda
Ruth said. 'The message here is that you can't predict what they'll send
next, Commander. Maybe something with a lightsail and crew in frozen
sleep. Maybe anything. And of course you didn't see all the ships that
came through."

     There was a long pause. 'Miss Blaine, we have a recorded message
for you."

     "Thank you."

     "Stand! by to record."

     "Standing by," Freddy said. "Got it. Thanks."

     "Commander, can we talk to the Moties?" Glenda Ruth asked. Another
pause.    "Yes, but I want to listen in."

     "That's all right," Glenda Ruth said. "Maybe you'll hear something
I haven't. We don't have a lot of time."

     "I'll connect you after you've read your message."

     "Thank you. We'll call you back," Freddy said. "Give us half an
hour. By the way, what time are you on?"

     "It's seventeen fifty-two here."

     "Thank you, we'll synchronize." Ship's time for Hecate was 1430,
early afternoon. They'd been on a twenty-four-hour ship's day since they
left Sparta. "Commander, would you or any of your officers care to join
us for dinner?"

     "Thank you, Mr. Townsend, hut we're on general alert here. For all
we know, there may he a fleet of Motie warships bearing down on us."

     "Oh. Yes, of course. Thank you. Half an hour, then."

     'Not much here," Glenda Ruth said. Chris says the Moties came
through, seven unarmed ships. One-hah."

     "Hah?"

     "One asked for Horace Bury, First thing they said."

     Freddy chuckled. Then he laughed. "Wow, Glenda Ruth, I've listened
to you and Jennifer trying to convince people how smart the Moties are-"

     "Actually, it was the only thing to do," Jennifer said. "Now that I
think of it. Look, if no one was waiting here, they'd go on into the
Empire and-what? Who might be glad to see them? Traders! And Bury's the
only trader they know about."

     "Well, all right, but I still wish I could have seen his face when
they asked for him," Freddy said. "What else do we have?"

     Glenda Ruth hesitated, then said, "Jennifer, it isn't really.
Obvious. They didn't ask for Imperial Autonetics. They asked for the
oldest man on the expedition, a full Motie lifetime ago!"

     "Mediator lifetime."

     "Whatever. Have you considered who they didn't ask for? Dad. Mom.
Bishop Hardy. Admiral Kutuzov! People who could exterminate them or save
them from someone else. Oh, hell, I don't have an answer. Chris wants us
thinking about it."

Jennifer was nodding. "A puzzlement. Hey Fyunch(click)s to humans can go
mad."

     "Oh, come on! And Horace Bury's is the one that stayed sane? I just
. . . Let's all keep thinking, okay?"

     "Okay. The message?"

     "Not much more. Kevin Renner's in charge of the expedition. I
always thought- "Yes?"

     Let's say it doesn't astound me that he's in charge. Renner left
orders to Balasingham to let us into the Mote system unless he has good
reason not to. Freddy, he won't want to let us go."

     "We'll see," Freddy said. "1 sure can't fight him."

     "Run away," Jennifer said. "He has to stay to guard the Moties, and
he won't shoot at us."

     "Don't be silly," Freddy said. "Loaded down the way we are, that
cruiser's boats could catch us with a long head start. Glenda Ruth, are
you sure we want to go to the Mote?"

     "I'm sure," Jennifer said.

     "Chris wants us. Freddy, what do they have to bargain with? The
Crazy Eddie Worm might make all the difference."

     "Shouldn't we leave a breeding set here?"

     "Pointless," Glenda Ruth said. "It won't be that long before the
Institute ship gets to New Cal. My parents, and all the worms you'd ever
want. But meanwhile, Bury and Renner may need bargaining chips fast."

     Freddy mulled it over. "Well, all right. Look, how big a hurry are
we in?"

     "The quicker the better. Why?"

     "Then we spend some time here." Freddy touched the intercom button.
"Kakumi, it's time to lighten ship. Strip down to racing trim. Leave
that special cargo in place, but otherwise lighten ship's stores."

     Jennifer caught his grimace. "What?"

     "George. He didn't volunteer for this. I'll leave him with the Navy
if they'll let me. I sure hope one of you can cook!"

 

     Hecate was in shambles. Freddy and Terry Kakumi worked to strip out
bulkheads, rearrange equipment, and neither wanted help from Glenda Ruth
or Jennifer. Glenda Ruth watched Freddy connect a hose to the foam wall,
suck the air out all in one shoomph, roll it up and expose the master
bedroom to all and sundry. Kakumi moved in with the hose, mated it to
the bed, and shoomph.

     To Hades with it, she thought. I'm going to take a shower while
there's still a shower facility.

     She felt superfluous. The Navy had no objections to Glenda Ruth's
talking to the Moties, but the Moties were taking their time about
answering the invitation. Why? Motie Mediators always wanted to talk;
the decision must come from the Master, the one called Marco Polo.

     Explorer and ambassador. The first expedition to the Mote had
consisted of two Imperial warships, MacArthur and Lenin, with Lenin
forbidden to talk to the Moties at all, and MacArthur greatly restricted
in what information could be passed along. The Moties had obtained
several books of human history from Chaplain Hardy of the MacArthur, but
none covered events as recent as the invention of the Alderson Drive.
That left them a limited number of human names and cultures to draw on,

     They had chosen: Marco Polo, the Master. Sir Walter Raleigh, the
senior Mediator. Interesting choice of names.

     Glenda Ruth heard Jennifer's voice as she wriggled out of the
shower bag. "Yes. Henry Hudson? Yes, of course... No, I can't promise
that, Mr. Hudson, but I can let you talk to my superior." Jennifer's arm
semaphored in frantic circles.

     Glenda Ruth slid quickly into a towelsuit and moved up beside her.

     Henry Hudson was a young Motie furred in brown and white; the
pattern didn't match Glenda Ruth's memories of Jock and Charlie. Family
markings differed, maybe. The creature seemed both strange and familiar.
This one was probably no more than twelve Mote Prime years old, but
Moties matured much faster than humans.

     And Mediators aboard the other Motie ships would be watching
everything. Glenda Ruth felt a surge of stage fright - nothing to what
Jennifer must be feeling.

     Good day to you, Ms. Ambassador," the Motie said. Brown irised
manlike eyes looked directly into hers. "Jennifer tells me you are
Glenda Ruth Blaine, addressed formally as the Honorable Ms. Blaine. I
call myself Henry Hudson, and I speak for Marco Polo, my Master. Might I
know the nature and extent of your political power?"

     Glenda Ruth smiled with the hint of a deprecating shrug. "Through
family relationships, but none given formally. We came in some haste.
I'll be granted some decision power just because I was here and others
weren't, and my family    She trailed off. It felt like talking to a
squid: the creature wasn't reacting right.

     She was vaguely aware that behind her Jennifer was speaking rapidly
and quietly into a mike. A middie was in the second viewscreen; then an
officer; then Balasingham himself. Good. He didn't try to interrupt.

     The Motie said, "It delights me to speak to you regardless."

     The creature's Anglic was textbook perfect. Her arms..."Your
progenitors visited us before my birth! Including your-father?"

     "Father and mother."

     "Ah. How did it change them?" Arms, shoulders, head, moved wrongly,
with a momentary illusion of broken joints, and Glenda Ruth was suddenly
terribly aware of her own arms, shoulders, fingers, body language -. -
moving without conscious thought, in a language learned from Charlie and
Jock. And suddenly she understood.

     "You were not trained by a human's Fyunch(click)!"

     No, milady." The Motie moved its arms in a pattern unfamiliar to
Glenda Ruth. "I have been taught your language, and some of your
customs. I am aware that you do not experience our cycle of
reproduction, and that your power structures are different from ours,
but I have been assigned no one human to study."

     "As yet."

     "As you say. Not until we meet the givers of orders in your
Empire." It paused. "You do not speak for your Masters. I have been told
that I would meet-humans-who were neither Mediator nor Master, but I
confess that the experience is stranger than I had anticipated."

     "You speak for . . .

     "Medina Traders and certain allied families, My sister Eudoxus
returned to the Mote with your ships."

     Glenda Ruth grinned. "Eudoxus. Medina Traders. For Mr. Bury's
benefit, of course."

     "Of course. The terms would be familiar to him."

     "But that name would imply that you do not speak for the Motie
species. Who are Medina Traders? Who must we negotiate with?"

     "We are the family with the foresight and the power to be here in
the moment after Crazy Eddie's Sister opened a path. You are surely
aware that none can speak for the Motie species. It's a problem, isn't
it? The Empire doesn't like that." Henry Hudson studied her for a
moment. His own posture still showed nothing. "You have learned Motie
customs, some of them, but from a group I have never met." It paused
again. "I wish to consult the Ambassador. Forgive me." The screen blanked.

     "What's happening?" Freddy asked.

     "I'm not sure. Captain Balasingham, have you spoken with these Moties?"

     "Only formalities, my Lady," Agamemnon's skipper said from the
viewscreen. We instructed them to take station here. They have requested
to be taken to our seat of government, and we told them that would
happen in due time. Not much else. There's something odd happening,
isn't there?"

     'Yes."

     "Why did he have to go running to his superior?"

     "He doesn't represent King Peter. Or anybody who knew King Peter's
family."

     "King Peter?" Balasingham prompted.

     'King Peter headed the Motie alliance that dealt with MacArthur and
Lenin. They sent us our first group of Motie ambassadors, the ones I
grew up with. But these Moties don't represent King Peter or any large
Motie group. He doesn't even know the . . . well, the signals, the body
language that Charlie and Jock taught me." Glenda Ruth's arms, torso,
shoulders, moved in twitchy intricacy as she recited, " 'Irony, nerves,
anger held in check, you ask too much, trust my words, trust me fully.'
Universal, simple stuff even a human can learn."

     Jennifer Banda wasn't breathing. Behind her unfocused eyes she was
trying to memorize what she had seen.

     "I'm afraid that still doesn't mean anything to me, my Lady,"
Balasingham said.

     This Motie represents a group that has been out of contact with
King Peter's group for a very long time," Glenda Ruth said. "Cycles.
Several cycles."

     When Balasingham frowned in puzzlement, Jennifer added, "But King
Peter's organization was very powerful. Widespread. Very likely planetwide."

     "Planetwide, indeed. They had to be," Glenda Ruth said.

     "So any group out of touch so long ..." Jennifer fell silent.

     "I still don't get it, but I guess I don't have to. So what are
they consulting about?" Balasingham demanded.

     "I hope," Glenda Ruth said, "I hope he's getting permission to tell
us the truth."

 

     "I am instructed to invite you to the Mote System," Henry Hudson
said. "To offer you any assistance we can to aid in that journey and
thereafter terminate this conversation. I regret that this is necessary"

     "I had hoped you would tell us much more.'

     "We will . . . explain everything, to those who have the power to
make decisions," the Motie said. "My Lady, you understand, when we talk
to you, we tell you more than we learn, yet if we convince you to aid
us, we must also convince others."

     "So you are still concealing Motie history," Glenda Ruth said.

     Details that might aid your bargaining position? Yes. Not the
basics. It is clear that you now know we are capable of war. You infer
our capabilities from the probes we have sent," Henry Hudson said. "But
you conceal your recent history, your military abilities, your
strategies, as is proper. Doubtless you will reveal these in due time.
As we will reveal ours. My Lady, it has been delightful speaking with
you, and I hope we will meet again after we have been permitted to speak
with those whom you obey. I will receive any recorded message you care
to send. Good-bye."

 

 

     Commander Balasingham pulled his lips into a tight line. "Andy, I
don't like this much."

     Anton Rudakov, Agamemnon's Sailing Master, nodded in sympathy.

     Balasingham activated the mike again. "Mr. Townsend, it's not yet
established that I should permit you to go, much less store your surplus
gear and personnel!"

     "Oh, well, that's all right, the Moties offered to take care of my
gear if you didn't have room," Freddy said.

     "Yeah, I heard that."

     "I mean, George will have to stay with you, but he's a retired Navy
cox'n, he won't be in the way. Good cook," the Honorable Freddy Townsend
said wistfully.

     Balasingham sighed. "Mr. Townsend, you want to go off to the Mote
system. Your ship is unarmed. We've been shooting at Motie ships since
before you were born!"

     "We've been invited," Freddy said. "By the Moties, Eudoxus and
Henry Hudson. We have recognition signals, and both say there won't be
any shooting."

     "They say it. And you're headed into totally uncharted areas. If
you don't come back, the Blaines will have my head even if your parents
don't. And to what end?"

     Glenda Ruth's voice spoke from off camera, and Freddy was seen to
wince a little. "Commodore Renner thought it was important. Mr. Bury
thought it was important enough to send one of his ships to rendezvous
with us and fill our tanks. It's important, Commander."

     "Okay, I'll give you that, they think it's a good idea, but ma'am,
that's a dangerous area."

     "Hecate's faster than most people think," Freddy said. "Now that
we've taken out the luxury stuff."

     "And you'll get lost-" Balasingham cut off the mike when he saw his
Sailing Master waving. "Yeah, Andy?"

     Anton Rudakov said, "Skipper, whatever happens to them, they're not
likely to get lost. I know you don't follow yacht racing much, but even
you have to have heard of Freddy Townsend."

     "Freddy Town- Oh. Invented something, didn't he?"

     "Reinvented. In the Hellgate race he did a gravity assist around
the star and then unfurled a lightsail. Everybody calls them spinnakers
now, but he was the first."

     "You sure that's him? He looks like a kid."

     "He started racing as crew on his cousin's ship when he was
twelve," Rudakov said. "Skippered his own at age seventeen. In the past
eight years he's won a bunch, Skipper. He lost at Heligate, though. The
sun flared and the sail shredded."

     Balasingham opened the mike again. "My crew tells me I ought to
know who you are, Mr. Townsend. And that I should ask you about the
Hellgate race."

     "Well, I didn't win that one," Freddy said.

"Suppose I send one of my officers with you?" "Thank you, no, "Suppose
there's a fight?"

     The image on the screen changed. A surprisingly adult young lady,
very serious. "Commander," Glenda Ruth said, "we do thank you for
worrying about us. But we don't need help! Freddy's ship will be faster
without any extra people. We have a good engineer, and if there's a
fight, we'll lose, and it won't matter if we have one or fifty of your
crew with us

     "Miss Blaine-"

     "Warriors," she said. "They're a Motie subspecies bred specifically
for war. Nobody's ever seen them in the flesh and lived. We have
statuettes of them on record. Our Motie ambassadors tried to tell us
they were mythical demons, and that's what they look like."

     Glenda Ruth's prose turned rich and purple as she went into detail.
Freddy found himself sweating. Given what she knew, why was she willing
to face such creatures? But Glenda Ruth had never backed away from a dare.

     "Exactly," Balasingham said patiently. "It's too dangerous."

     "If we're attacked, we'll surrender," she told him. "And talk."

     "Why would they listen?"

     "We have something they want. We need to put it in Commodore
Renner's hands so that he'll have something to negotiate with."

     "What is it, Miss Blaine?"

     "I'm afraid that's not my secret, Commander. My father gave it to
me. I expect you'll find out in a few weeks, The trouble is, in a few
weeks almost anything could happen. Commander, you're risking your ship,
your crew, the whole Empire, on your ability to block the Moties from
getting past you."

     'It's not what I'd choose-"

     "And we admire you for it. But we all know it may not work.
Commodore Renner and His Excellency are trying their own approach, and
they've asked for our help. Commander, some of the aristocracy may be
riding on its privileges, but the Blaines don't!"

     Then, more reasonably, but in a tone that did not even hint that it
could be disobeyed: "We have a fast ship. Freddy's a racing pilot, his
computer is better than yours, our engineer is first rate, and I can
talk to Moties better than anyone including my brother. We thank you for
your concern. Freddy, let's go. Thank you, Commander."

     The screen darkened for a moment.

     "She wouldn't dare," Balasingham muttered

     The screen showed the Honorable Frederick Townsend. "Hecate
requesting permission to come alongside for fueling," he said formally.

     Balasingham heard Rudakov chuckling. No sympathy there! He turned
back to the screen. "Permission granted. You can turn your excess
baggage over to Chief Halperin."

     "Very good. Also, if you have chocolate or oranges aboard
Agcimemnoii, we'll need it all."

     Balasingham was beyond surprise. "I'll find out. Godspeed, Hecate."

     "Thank you."

 

 

 

     I-point dead ahead," Freddy said. "Jump in ten minutes. Secure for
Alderson Jump. Ladies, strap in good."

     Hecate was an empty shell. The main cabin area was crossed by
nemourlon webbing. The elaborate shower was gone. Of the cooking gear,
only a heater remained. With the walls the oversize water tank made a
conspicuous bulge.

     Glenda Ruth and Jennifer used the harness attachments at the center
of the web. Freddy typed instructions to the ship as Terry Kakumi went
from system to system, manually shutting each down to prevent accidental
activation following the jump.

"We shouldn't find any trouble," Glenda Ruth said. "HenryHudson said
that Medina controls the space around the Jumppoint . . - Crazy Eddie's
Sister. I have recognition signals."

"Why do I feel you lack confidence?" Jennifer asked.

"No messages," Glenda Ruth said. "Renner, my brother, Bury- they'd try
to get a message through, and even if they didn't manage it, the skipper
of Atropos-Rawlins-would have been ordered to get a message out. Freddy,
doesn't Atropos carry a boat that could do that?"

"Yep. Longboats on light cruisers have both Field and Drive."

"Fuel?" Jennifer wondered.

"There'd be enough to pop through and squirt a message," Freddy said.
"Clear enough they couldn't do that. We might guess that somebody won't
let 'em."

"Which means-we're about to Jump into what?" Jennifer asked."Maybe
they'll shoot first! Like we do at the blockade!"

"Not likely." Freddy turned back to his console.

"He's right," Glenda Ruth said. "Look at it. They sent the unarmed
embassy fleet. What could they gain by luring ships into the Mote system
and destroying them'? That wouldn't make sense."

"And we know Moties always make sense," Jennifer said banteringly.
"Don't we?"

"Want to go home?" Glenda Ruth asked.

"Humpf."

"Here we go," Freddy said. "We'll go through at nine kilometers a second
relative to the Mote. That's close enough to orbital velocity at the
other end. Should keep us from running into anything. Other hand, it'll
make it easy for anyone to catch us. That okay, Glenda Ruth?"

"Yes."If the tiny note of uncertainty in her voice upset him, Freddy
Townsend didn't show it. "Stand by, then. Here we go."

 

 

Crazy Eddie's Sister was a hundred hours and more than a hundred million
kilometers behind Sinbad. Almost everyone was asleep. Buckman was on
watch, and Joyce Trujillo had wakened long before she wanted to. She saw
it first.

     Indicators blinking in the display in front of Buckman. Faerie
lights glowing in the magnified display aft, colored balloons, a flash.
"Jacob? Isn't that-"

     "Activity at the I-point," Buckman said. His voice was thick with
fatigue. "We're getting a relay. It's six light-minutes to the I-point,
don't know how far the relay ship is from it. Kevin! Captain!"

     Everyone crowded into the lounge. Kevin Renner blinked at the
displays while Buckman spoke rapidly. "It's a battle, of course. Looks
like a third fleet just arriving."

     "See if you can get me Eudoxus," Renner said.

     "There's a ship!" Joyce said.

     "No Field. Not a Navy ship," Blaine said.

     The ship's entry triggered events in ever-widening circles. Motie
ships changed course. Some fired on others. Those near the intruder-
"Bombs," Buckman said. The newcomer rotated, tumbled, rotated- "That's
Hecate," Blaine said.

"How do you know?" Joyce demanded.

"Well, it's an Empire-style racing yacht, Joyce."

     Joyce was silent. Renner said, "I can't do anything about this
myself. Chris, shall we tell them what the treasure is? It might
motivate them."

     Blaine thought about it. His lips moved rapidly, talking silently
to himself; then he said, "No sir. Let me talk to Eudoxus; you're
asleep. But we're in a better bargaining position if they don't know
about the Worm. We'll let Glenda Ruth work her end."

     "If she lives."

 

 

     The Master of Base Six, Mustapha Pasha as he would be called when
the humans arrived, was lactating. With a babe cradled in his right arms
and the urge to mate rising in him, he was not in a proper mood for
crisis. Emergencies never happen at a convenient time.

     He'd been given this much luck: East India Trading's Masters had no
wish to be in Mustapha's company at such a time. Most of them were
keeping to their own dome and domains when East India's signal arrived.
They must have heard in the same instant that Mustapha did: the Crazy
Eddie point had moved.

     If it was a false alarm, Medina Trading would lose much bargaining
power. Mustapha Pasha would likely die, executed for murder.

     Such was luck and such was life. Mustapha began issuing orders.
Only details were needed; these plans were years and decades old.

     First: bumblebee-sized missiles sprayed the East India dome. Four
got through. Most of East India's Masters had been in the ruptured dome,
and a third of their Warriors, too, kept as a guard.

     East India's remaining Warriors reacted at once; but Mustopha's
Warriors were already attacking. Bombs and energy beams tore the Base
Six iceball and its fragile housing. Clouds of ice crystals exploded
from the surface; colored flashes lit them from within. A kamikaze
attack destroyed one of the farming domes. Without orders to guide them,
East India's Warriors were going berserk. It didn't matter. They would
have had to die, each and all of them, regardless

     Of other Classes, many died, too. Mustapha Pasha had enough of
Engineers and Doctors and the space-specialized Farmers, who tended the
agricultural domes. The remaining Masters of East India Company were
held safe, and enough others to give them an entourage. They would serve
as hostages until new terms could be made.

     After all, East India and Medina were not in fundamental
disagreement. They must re-divide certain resources and assign access to
the powerful aliens on the fir side of the Sister; but this was best
thought of as a gambling game waged with lasers and gamma beams and
projectiles, technology and false maps and treachery.

 

 

7 Labyrinth of Lies

 

 

As for those with whom you have made a treaty and who abrogate it every
time, and do not fear God, If you meet them in battle, inflict on them
such a defeat as would be a lesson for those who come after them, and
that they may be warned. For God does not like those who are treacherous.

 

-al-Qur'an

 

 

     Freddy always recovered first.

     And Freddy was swearing in a lurid mumble as his fingers wobbled
over the controls. Hecate's oversize attitude jets kicked the racing
yacht about like a windball. Glenda Ruth surged in the elastic web, her
vision wobbling about the cabin, uncontrolled. Jennifer was whimpering,
trying to curl up. Terry offered no resistance to the turbulence,
waiting until his body would obey him.

     "Feddy lub," Glenda Ruth said, her tongue like a foreign invader in
her mouth, "Freddy! Calm down and talk to me about it!"

     "Talk." Another surge, milder this time. "We're surrounded.
Embedded in an armada of teeny warships fighting another armada of teeny
warships, Coal Sack direction. Nukes going flash. Radiation count is
scary. I'm trying to get the water tank between us and that, if I can
stop the lizard-raping rotation!" He was wailing like a child.

     "That will do it?"

     "Yeah. The water-the water tank. That's what it's for, partly, stop
us from getting fried. Partly, when I dive near a sun-that's got it! And
there goes another bomb, flash, wouldn't you know, but I think it's
blocked, too." He bashed at keys again. "Damn!" Held one key down.
"There. Now I think it's safe to wake up the computer, but I'll send it
a test problem before I give it control. . . -

     "Not yet. Another minute. Anyway, when we dive near a sun to get a
gravity assist, I don't want solar radiation sleeting through Hecate, so
I mounted this mucking great water tank alongside the cabin for a
shield. And I freeze it. Then the hull's superconducting, of course, so
I can cool the hull by running a wire into the water tank. I can do
serious aerobraking or get awfully close to a sun because it can't fry
us without first boiling all that thermal mass of water, and even then I
can vent the steam-" Freddy sagged back. "And I guess the battle isn't
going to fry us, but those ships might unless you talk to them.
Computer's safe now. How are you doing?"

     "How do I sound?"

     "Lucid."

     "I'll try talking to them. I don't think I want to move, though.
Can you connect me?"

     "Sure-one moment. Terry?" No answer. He stays out longer than me.
All right, you're on the frequency Henry Hudson gave us."

     She spoke the syllables she'd been told would show her to be an
honored guest of Medina Traders. Nothing. She spoke again.

     "That got a reaction," Freddy said. "Two of the ships out there-
they've changed course. Others are shooting at them-Wups!"

     "What?"

     A fierce green blaze bathed Freddy's face, from a screen she
couldn't see. "Someone just tried to boil us! No real damage, but I sure
hope they don't do it again. And-look here. Can you see the screen?"

     An alien face. A brown-and-white, a Mediator. It spoke alien words.
Nothing she recognized at all, It spoke again- "They hit us again!"
Freddy said. "Not so hard, but do something!"

     "Surrender, she said. "There's a word-"

     "Use it! We can't take many more hits like that!"

     "Right. Freddy, we'll have to open the airlock. Both doors."

     He did things to the controls. "Whenever you say. Jennifer and

Terry are sealed in, suit integrity checks. Yours too. Whenever you say."

     "Leave the light on in the airlock. No other lights."

     "Romantic."

     She considered various answers and chose, "Yeah."

 

 

 

     "Let me get this straight," Renner said. "You want me to rig
something that makes static and simulates a failure in the communication
system."

     "Only in the transmission system," Bury said. "Elementary
politeness, Kevin. I wish sometimes to be able to observe the Moties
while we are not ourselves observed. Let them see static, while we
continue to receive their signals. Give the control to me, and do not
use it except as I direct. Can you do this?"

     "Sure. It could even be real, once or twice, but won't they be
suspicious?"

     "Of course they will be suspicious. Thank you."

     "Need it right now?"

     "It would do no harm."

 

     "There are now three fleets at Crazy Eddie's Sister," Eudoxus said.
"The new faction we will call the East India Trading Company, a group
based in the Belt asteroids, but with many ships. East India was a
nominal ally of ours until a few hours ago."

     "What happened then?" Renner demanded.

     "They will be allies again when we have negotiated new changes in
status. I will explain later. In any event East India appears to be
losing. So are we. The Crimean Tartars retain possession of your third
ship."

     "Three fleets. One's yours. Do you have any ships left?"

     "One intelligence ship, with a Mediator aboard who is relaying
data. Our other warships could do no good and have been ordered   to
retreat. No fighting ships remain near Crazy Eddie's Sister."

     "Damnation. What can you do?"

     "Inform my Master. Request means to communicate with the

Crimean Tartars, learn what I can of their situation and goals, and ask
what I may offer in trade. You must tell me, Kevin, what must I ask for,
what must we have, and what may they keep?"

     "Mmm..." Kevin rubbed his face. Bristles. "The ship, Hecate,
probably isn't worth saving. We want the humans, three to five humans
back in good order. Tell them the Empire will be enraged if anything
happens to those humans."

     "It will, too," Joyce said. "They once sent a hundred ships to
avenge the death of a Prince Imperial."

     "I hadn't heard that story," Renner said. "Thank you, Joyce."

     "Are these people that important?" Eudoxus demanded. "Not quite,"
Renner said. "Next thing to it, though. Eudoxus, there are goods,
including trade goods aboard Hecate. Some will be very valuable.
Others-if possible, consult with the woman Mediator on Hecate. Her name
is"-he glanced at Chris Blaine and got a nod-"the Honorable Glenda Ruth
Blaine."

     "Blaine. As I understand your naming conventions, she will be the
daughter of a lord. A Lord Blaine. We know of a Lord Blaine."

     "That's the one," Renner said.

     "The commander of MacArthur. Second-in-command of your first
expedition to us. You have not exaggerated her importance."

     "Right. So get Glenda Ruth's opinion as to what to do with those
trade goods."

     "Their nature?"

     "Not known to me. I'd expect them to carry chocolate, though."

     "I never tasted chocolate," Eudoxus said.

     "The Tartars can have this consignment. We'll get more for you when
we can. There may even be some aboard Atropos. Okay?"

     "Thank you. They will put restrictions on contacts with their- guests."

     "Right. Stand by, I'll see if we have more instructions."

     "With your permission I will begin making the Crimeans understand
the importance of what they hold. Also to tell them of your life support
requirements"

     "Good. Thank you." Renner switched off. "Horace?"

     Bury had watched in silence. He sipped at the coffee Nabil had
brought. "One or another human might want to stay as liaison. Be
prepared to give in on this, but ask for the return of all. I think it
best not to mention the nature of the cargo."

     "Chocolate?" Joyce asked.

     Buckman said, "Signal from Eudoxus. Urgent message."

     Chris Blaine inhaled sharply, started to say something, but didn't.

     "Everyone ready? Here goes." Renner thumbed the communications
controls. 'News, Eudoxus?"

     "Yes, Our observation ship reports that there are now two Crimean
Tartar ships attached alongside Hecate. The ship itself does not appear
to be harmed and was sending messages just prior to its capture."

     Chris Blaine's relief was obvious. Captured was better than killed.

     "One message was a broadcast of a Medina Traders hailing signal,"
Eudoxus said. "The rest were to Crimean Tartar ships and were not
intercepted. Stand by a moment-here is one we recorded."

     The viewscreen showed a human in full space gear, helmet closed,
attached to a web of restraining lines. "We come in peace.
Fnamyunch(sniff!)."

     "That latter is a Medina Traders recognition signal," Eudoxus said.
"She could only have obtained it by speaking with our embassy ship."

"That should help with your negotiations," Bury said.

     "Ah? Ah, yes, Excellency, if they believe us, and they should.
Thank you."

     "Right," Renner said. "Stay on that. Anyone else? Good. Eudoxus,
please call your Master and establish negotiations with the Crimean
Tartars."

"We are beginning that now. I will be needed shortly."

     "Right. Then do something else for me. Call me back. And try to
tell me who all these people are?"

     Eudoxus nodded his head and shoulders, smiling, and vanished.

 

 

 

     The colored lights in the control display were the only lights in
Hecate. Hecate's four crew waited in a vast dark space, listening to
clanking and thudding from the hull. They talked in whispers, and rarely.

With a sound like a gunshot, an elliptical section of hull blasted loose
and into Hecate, edge on, straight toward Glenda Ruth, Jennifer
shrieked, Freddy yelled warning. Glenda Ruth snapped her tether webbing
loose and kicked herself clear . . . almost clear. The mass banged her
flailing foot and tumbled aft, its course unaltered, and banged around
back there where the cabin tapered to a rounded point. The cabin
pressure fell rapidly, climbed, changed again, then stabilized.

     Glenda Ruth's unladylike swearing fell into a sudden silence.

     She hadn't seen the Motie enter.

     Its gripping hand found a handhold. The crude-looking gun in its
right hands was pointed at Glenda Ruth. She screamed and covered her
face, then hurriedly grabbed a handhold and spread her hands wide.

     Freddy asked, "Are you hurt?"

     "It cracked me on the shin. Stay tethered, guys. The Motie might
have shot me because I was moving. Just wait it out."

     "It's a Warrior," Jennifer said.

     "I think so. It's got toes, but . . yeah."

     Now the Warrior was gripping handholds with its feet, through
digital gloves. A second weapon had appeared, a spiked club. The
Warrior's head and shoulders swiveled rapidly. Its gun pointed
everywhere. It leaped across the cabin, thudded against the wall, and
scanned from there. When it was satisfied, it warble-whistled.

     Another Motie came through. It was squat compared to the greyhound
look of the Warrior. Its pressure suit hid the pattern of fur, but its
behavior identified it: it was a Brown, an Engineer. Another Engineer
followed and pulled a transparent balloon after it through the hole.
Shapes moved within.

     The Engineers converged on the controls, sliding past and around
Hecate's crew, ignoring them. One began to play with the controls.
Freddy seemed braced for disaster, but nothing much was happening.

     Another Motie entered. A pressure suit hid her fur; she was a bit
larger than the Engineers. A Mediator? The Engineers huddled with the
new one, then kicked themselves aft. One opened the balloon and released
four Motie shapes each less than half a meter long. They began to work
at the aft of Hecate's cabin.

     "Brownies," Jennifer said.

     Glenda Ruth peered close. The little ones were chocolate brown,
darker than an Engineer; and each of these had four arms. Watchmakers,
"brownies," the Class that had destroyed MacArthur. All but one. The
fourth was crawling carefully along the wall, toward the bridge. It was
a different color, cream and pale brown, and it had three arms.

     It launched from the wall, impacted against Jennifer, and clung. It
chirped at her and waited for a response.

     Glenda Ruth spoke to the big Motie. "Hello? Can you speak?"

     The Motie watched her. "We come in peace for all mankind, and for
your sake, too." Glenda Ruth said. "Can you understand me? We carry
trade goods. We have the right to make binding treaties."

     The newest Motie disappeared through the hole. Ignoring her.

     "I can't really tell, but that thing doesn't move like it has
anything to say. I don't think it's a Mediator," Glenda Ruth said.
"Freddy, don't touch any controls."

     "Brace yourselves," Terry said.

     Glenda Ruth asked, "Why?" before she noticed that the Warrior had
anchored itself with three limbs out of five. A moment later the cabin
shuddered and rocked.

     Freddy said, "That's torn it. Glenda Ruth, you-"

     There was thrust. It built up smoothly over six or seven seconds to
a tenth of a gravity and stopped.

     Freddy said, "My readings don't connect to the rest of the ship.
They've disconnected the cabin."

     Jennifer began to laugh. "Maybe they'll bring the rest separately,"
she said, "and give it back."

     "Oh, thank you very much. Nevertheless I fear Hecate's racing days
are over. Any idea what's happening?"

     Glenda Ruth said carefully, "Ooyay ohknay apingtay us eythey areay"

     'What? Ah. What else?'

     "Henry Hudson and the Medina Traders believed themselves in control
here," she said. "Clearly they aren't."

     "Who is?"

     "I don't know, but it changes everything, doesn't it? The Empire
will make no important deals with anyone who doesn't speak for all of
the Moties."

     "Oh. All right. Now what just happened?"

     "We've been captured by a warship. They don't understand what they
have, but they can see it's valuable, so they'll be asking for orders.
Eventually they'll send a Mediator. Who may or may not know Anglic, Freddy."

 

     "There's air," Freddy said. "Best open up the suits to save the air
tanks."

     Jennifer tentatively opened her faceplate. "Smells all right- hey!"

     Terry Kakumi swiveled toward her. "What?"

     "It's a Mediator pup!" Jennifer said. "It has to be. Look, brown
and white, and not much bigger than a Watchmaker, that's what it is.
Glenda Ruth-"

     "Figures," Glenda Ruth said. "As soon as they knew they'd be
dealing with humans, they bred a Mediator. Jennifer, I think you've got
a friend for life."

 

     Jennifer and the Mediator pup considered each other wonderful.
Jennifer cradled it in her arms and answered when it talked. The sounds
it made were nonsense, but gradually they began to sound like Jennifer
herself.

     When she handed the creature to Terry, it cried and tore itself
free and jumped off Terry's chin to reach her again. The pup wanted no
part of other humans.

     So the waiting was hard for the rest of them, and the entertainment
thin. Glenda Ruth considered running a history flick on the monitors.
Were the other classes, the Warriors and Engineers, really so
specialized that they wouldn't watch?

     "They've plugged all the holes in the cabin," Freddy said. "Near as
I can tell, this is normal Hecate air."

     "Temperature's all right, too," Jennifer said. She fondled the
pups's ear.

     "Obvious. They tore the cabin loose and sealed it and gave us our
own life support system back. We're alive but helpless. They'll have
time to copy our gear before anything stops working," Glenda Ruth said.
"Air doesn't worry me as much as..."

     "Yes?"

     "Freddy, there may be more battles. Over us."

     "Good news from all over," Jennifer Banda said. "I always wondered
what the crown felt like when the lion and the unicorn fought over it."

 

 

     Eudoxus seemed calm. "My Master has been informed. She will set
other Mediators to the task of regaining your companions. Our
observations show that the inhabited portions of Hecate have been
detached from the rest of the ship. The life support systems appear to
be intact. Meanwhile, there is heavy message traffic throughout that
region. I'll pass on more information as it develops."

     Renner said, "But you can at least tell me who's involved, can't you?"

     "I can tell you what we have learned of the Crimean Tartars. They
were among the powers in the moon system of Mote Beta until they were
cast out in a complicated contest with the major Mote Beta clan we call
Persia. The Tartar group then subsisted on trade and service to other
powers until they were swallowed by the Khanate. They're much smaller
now, of course, and as nothing has been heard of them, we thought they
must have been successfully integrated into the Khanate families. In
light of their capture of your ship we must conclude that they retained
some independent identity."

     Renner considered the death rate implicit in the phrase they're
much smaller now among a people who die if they can't get pregnant.
"Okay. East India?"

"Please reassure me that His Excellency is listening."

Horace Bury sighed. "Put me on."

Kevin turned off his mike. "You sure?"

     "We will learn from each other. If I can't catch him in a lie,
perhaps"-he jerked his head at Chris Blaine-"another can."

     Kevin nodded and swiveled the camera. Bury said, "Greetings, Eudoxus."

     The Motie bowed; the one ear folded flat, then extended.

     "You spoke of the year we spent in Mote system as Period One,
Period Two you spent sending ships to break the Empire blockade at
Murcheson's Eye. Is it so?"

     "Yes, Excellency. Period One began as MacArthur intercepted a miner
belonging to Medina Trading. Thereafter a Mote Prime group headed by a
powerful planetary Master who called himself King Peter took control of
communications with the human expedition."

     "Was there a battle?" Renner asked.

     "None that you were intended to notice."

     "I saw none.' Renner said.

     "His Excellency noticed the change," Eudoxus said. "I know because-"

     "Yes, of course," Bury said. "What I saw was that the Mote Prime
group had no interest at all in the creature we had aboard- and although
that Engineer had sent a message to its home, nothing came of that."

     Bloody Hell," Renner muttered. "The Skipper never thought of that,
and neither did I."

     That also was clear," Eudoxus said. "Only His Excellency understood
the true situation." He looked expectantly at Bury. "So. Period One
ended with MacArthur destroyed and your battleship Lenin departing Mote
system. The ship and its recorded observations sent back by our Engineer
you took aboard gave Medina knowledge of how to build an energy shield .
. . Langston Field? Name of a human inventor?'

     Kevin said, "Right."

     The Motie was amused. Naming a tool for an Engineer! "Our
wanderings began shortly after. Our Master saw that there would be great
changes, and Medina Traders would not be powerful enough to hold where
we were. Thus we traded what we had to Persia: they would take our
territory and give us ships. Then during our withdrawal from the Mote
Beta Trailing Trojans," she said, "our Engineers developed a working
Langston Field and traded it to Persia for more assistance in
withdrawing to the Comets.

     "It was bad timing. If we had been larger and more powerful, we
need not have abandoned our base at all. With what we gave them and what
they had, Persia came to rule the Mote Beta moons. They didn't merely
arm ships with your Field. They skimmed through the remains of the Mote
Beta Ring. After a million years of mining, the planet retained only a
narrow ring of dust, but that was megatons of dust. One pass and Persia
had it all. We could have had that ourselves . . . but we were too far
away and might not have held it, and in any case we had set our sights
further."

     Blaine caught Bury's eye. They exchanged nods. Blaine's voice came
to Renner on the private intercom circuit. "Medina plans far and acts
fast. And they've got some of the best Engineers in the system.

     "During Period Two we tested your blockade at the Eye." Eudoxus
said, "To do that we needed the assistance of the group we call
Byzantium. This is a large and powerful coalition located in the Mote
Gamma moons, far from Persia, far from our original home in Mote Beta's
Trailing Trojans. I may give you details of our negotiations with them-"

     "For the moment, continue your story."

     "Well, then, various bandits had already noted our activity. East
India Company was one of those. This is the group I spoke of, asteroid
based, many ships, nominal allies of Medina until recently, and should
be again if things go as planned.

     "Still with me? The period during which the Curdle in the Coal Sack
might be expected to collapse is Period Three. King Peter of Mote Prime
gave you data we knew to be incorrect, data indicating that the Curdle
would not become a star for some time. Incidentally, King Peter's data
were incorrect also. They did not expect the star to ignite for another
fifty of your years. We knew better, and we had the advantage of knowing
what the Empire had been told. Of course we did not know precisely when
the star would form, and indeed the date we expected was years too early."

     "Wow," Joyce said. Her voice was barely audible.

     Renner grinned slightly and looked to be sure that she was
recording. Good. That gave them an extra copy for insurance. It would
take study to be certain he understood everything Eudoxus was saying.

     "Period Three opens around a hundred thousand hours ago," Eudoxus
continued. "We prepared to exploit the new opening. Medina Traders began
sending probes solely to determine whether the Crazy Eddie point had
jumped. From your viewpoint these ships would still have come
sporadically, and we still shaped them to shake the Empire's composure.
You were not to notice a difference. We could afford nothing so
flamboyant as the iceball fleet. . . . Did that have any success?"

     Chris Blaine wiggled his eyebrows, offstage. Bury said. "Only in
exciting our admiration."

     Our later probes were cheaper, but still our resources were not
expanding to match our tasks. While our estimates were better than King
Peter's, we made ready too early, and it was costly to remain in a state
of readiness. Power shifted among the Mote Gamma families. Medina's
behavior was becoming too conspicuous, our security was getting less
attention than-"

     Bury said, "You were expanding too fast."

     Eudoxus-Bury3A-nodded reluctantly. "Wealth that should have gone to
security went to feed our growing numbers. Eighty thousand hours ago,
East India Company surged out of the Mote Gamma Leading Trojans and took
possession of the Crazy Eddie point. They replenished the cost of that
mighty battle by dismantling two of our probes already en route to the Eye."

     "Where was your ally Byzantium?"

     "Far around its orbit, too distant to interfere directly,
preoccupied with local problems, and unable to send a large battle
fleet. They were not happy, and they blained us for our carelessness.
But the Curdle's collapse was slow in coming, and nobody loves blockade
duty."

     That's for damn sure, Renner thought, and caught an answering nod
from Chris Blaine.

     "Having been dispossessed, we did what we could to recover our
position. Medina Traders brought the East India Company in on part of
the secret. Having taken the old Crazy Eddie point, East India Company
was given the obligations, too. Byzantium gave them your Fyunch(click)'s
second student's third apprentice."

     Kevin said, "Just so I don't get lost -

     "Bury-One has died. Medina Traders has Bury 3A, me. Byzantium still
has Bury 2 and Bury 3B. Byzantium's Bury 3C went to East India Company.
Another family bought Bury 3D while they still had wealth; they may have
sold some Bury-Fours. Byzantium may be training others."

     Bury stared at the misshapen shadow in wonder. "Have I become the
basis of your economy?"

     "Not extensively, Excellency, not yet. Of course I am become
immensely more valuable since I have had the honor of speaking with you
directly."

     "Wonderful."

     Our own problem was that East India Company sent the cheapest
possible probes. You were bound to notice. I expect that was why you
arrived so rapidly?. . - Yes. But having a Horace Bury Fyunch(click)
made East India Company more confident than they should have been-as we
intended. Their Bury student is not an astronomer, We gave them a wrong
mapping for the expected new Crazy Eddie point, and they accepted it."

     "They may be annoyed with you. They are attacking these
interlopers, the Crimean Tartars, but whom were they sent to attack?"

     "Excellency, you may well- Excuse me," Eudoxus said, and the
monitor screen went dark.

     Kevin said, "Blaine?"

     Chris Blaine said, "The Motie ships got easier to hit nine years
ago. Before my time, but the records show. The Crazy Eddie Squadron
thought it was because we were getting better at it."

     Bury was nodding, enjoying himself. "The word Byzantine might have
been invented just for Moties," he said. "Well, Kevin?"

     "We can make maps. Computer maps, holograms that move. We should."

     "Yes. Jacob'?"

     "I've been doing that. Horace, I think your interests and mine may
have converged at last. Have a look at this." All the monitors suddenly
bloomed with an axial view of the Mote system. For a moment it held,
then began turning like a sluggish whirlpool.

     "Now, note." Buckman's pointer traced along the shaded ring of
comets. "Mote Gamma is resources for anyone in this region. A better
source than the nearby comets, right? Because comets are so far apart.
Where Mote Gamma is passing, there's an economic boom. When Gamma's
gone, there's a recession. Sanity check, Horace?"

     'Very likely. The boom would stretch over perhaps twenty degrees of
arc before costs grow too great. Mote Beta would be too close to the sun
for such an effect. And if . . . what are these marks? The old Jump
point to the Eye, the new one ..."

     "Right."

     They weren't moving. Matter flowed around and past them.

     "The Crazy Eddie points. And the new Jump to the red dwarf, Crazy
Eddie's Sister. Thirty degrees around from Mote Gamma, and up ten
degrees along the Mote's axis. Medina Trading had no easy access to the
Mote Gamma resources."

     Renner watched the map display rotate. The Crazy Eddie point, not
far outward from Mote Beta's orbit, had moved a few hundred thousand
klicks when Buckman's Protostar (the Curdle) became Buckman's Star. But
the Sister was a billion klicks away, above the plane of the system and
well beyond Mote Gamma.

     Eudoxus was back. "Excellency, Captain, my Master will act to
recover your people and goods. Our bargaining position is worsening.
Hecate is in flight with a Crimean Tartar escort, twelve ships of
varying size, running out from the sun and wide of the Khanate
positions. It seems the Tartars have severed relations with the Khanate.
Thirty-six Tartar ships remain in command of the Sister. The East India
Company contingent has fled."

     Bury's eyes met Kevin's; he didn't speak.

     The Motie said, "Your lost ship should be safe in the hands of the
Crimean Tartars. No player in this game would risk harm to something so
valuable, not even pirate groups like the Khanate, who can only guess
Hecate's value from the maneuvering of others. . . - We'll negotiate how
to bring you together,"

     Of course a Mediator would negotiate, Kevin thought. She could
hardly plan a war, though if she could estimate relative strengths but
if Hecate must be rescued, it must be up to the Empire ships.

     "So you had East India watching the wrong part of the sky," he
said. "And now they're pissed?"

     "Just so. But they don't command the wealth they had when they
wrested the Crazy Eddie point from us. They sent cheap token ships to
the Eye, and they can't afford a real war fleet either."

     "Tell me about the Khanate."

     "Ah, yes, the Khanate. You see, Medina Trading's main base is deep
among the comets, not conveniently close to the Sister. A succession of
large comets have served as inner bases, generally a few light-minutes
from the Sister. We're en route for Inner Base Six even now, and more of
our ships will meet us there. But as an immediate source of volatiles
and water and ores, we sometimes move a small comet head to pass very
near the expected Sister

     "The Khanate is based in a cluster of comets outward and forward of
Medina Trading. They expect wealth to surge their way when Mote Gamma
moves into place in fifty thousand hours. Meanwhile they survive as
bandits. They must have wondered at the mad placement of our small
comet, but they covet the resources. But the Crimean Tartars seem to
know why we wanted resources in place."

     Bury asked, "Might they be working with someone else?"

     "Instruct me," said the Motie.

     "Merely a question, Eudoxus. Who knew of the Sister? Medina and
Byzantium and East India, and whoever else might deduce the truth from
observation. East India was given a false locus for the Sister, but were
you truly prepared to deal fairly with Byzantium?"

     "Of course," Eudoxus said.

     "Any Motie family could learn the truth by observation and
deduction," Bury said. "But Byzantium already knew. Perhaps Byzantium
grew unhappy with the notion that Medina would command the Sister, so
far from Byzantium's sway. Then Byzantium might seek allies easier to
dominate."

 

     "Only a passing thought. Finish your tale, Eudoxus."

     The Motie needed a moment to react. "Tale?  Easily told. We were
already embattled when East India signaled that a token ship intended
for the Crazy Eddie point had failed to pop through to the Eye. We sent
tokens along the arms of the arc where the Sister was to be expected. An
expedition of ten ships was launched after, provisioned and manned well
in advance, and all running from the firefight with the Khanate fleet.
The rest of the Medina fleet followed in a guarded retreat, abandoning
our little comet, intending to take possession of Crazy Eddie's Sister.

     "By then East India Company's neutrino gauges and telescopes must
have seen the action. They have reason for complaint, as you point out.
They took our territory by force. Then they donated resources to the
exercise: ten years' or more worth of their pitiful token ships. Now
they learn that the Sister is not where they were told, but Medina's
fleet is in place. They sent ships.

     "None of this surprised us much. But when the Crimean Tartars fleet
followed us, we were taken by surprise. Medina expected the entire
Khanate fleet to remain with the comet. When our first ship disappeared,
the Tartars were seen to correct course. They must have known what they
were doing."

     Jacob Buckman's head popped up at Renner's ear. "They knew better
than Medina."

     Renner turned. "Talk to me."

     "Why did the Khanate attack now? Now puts the Tartars in just the
right position to take the Sister. It looks like some genius among the
Tartars-"

     "Figured out exactly when the Curdle would collapse. Uh-huh.
Eudoxus, you concur?"

     "It's not my field, Captain Renner. I'll ask. Or they might have
been told."

     "By whom?"

     "By anyone! Do you believe I have told you of all the families here?"

     "Okay. Go on."

     "The Tartars destroyed two of the ten Medina expedition ships. One
missed the Sister. The rest of us reached the orange dwarf. Our fleet
tried to hold the Sister until Byzantium's reinforcements could arrive,
but these were not expected soon, or with confidence. Mote Beta is too
far. But they held long enough for us all to pop through into an ongoing
battle."

     "But not long enough to protect Hecate."

     "No. And that brings us to present time. In ten hours we will reach
Inner Base Six."

 

 

8 Medina Base Six

Rebellious angels are worse than unbelieving men.

 

-St. Augustine, City of God

 

 

Base Six had changed. Shaped charges blasted most of the worked mass of
what had been a comet into shards. A snowstorm of dirty ice and ammonia
and rock, all useful ores until the advent of the Sister, expanded in
the direction of the battle raging at the Sister. If the detritus didn't
shield Base Six from weapons, it would at least blind all watchers. Only
Medina's Masters would guess what was happening here, and they only
because they had shored in the planning.

     The white sphere that remained was colder than a comet need be.
East India had known of the refineries that made hydrogen and the ships
that took it away, but had never known of the heat pumps. The hydrogen
hadn't all been used to fuel ships, and most of the ships hadn't gone
all the way out to Medina Trading.

     Medina Base Six had become a compact hydrogen iceball with a shell
of foamed hydrogen ice. Thus insulated and minutely cooled by
evaporation, it would hold its cold for decades; possibly centuries.
Buried in the iceball was an industrial-sized Empire style shield
generator that had served all six inner bases.

     Base Six was too close to the action, too vulnerable.

     Its three dozen ships were mostly disassembled. They always had
been, always visibly under repair. East India's visiting Muster had
complained of this, but had never seen the significance of all those
dismounted rocket motors.

     Now Medina's Engineers mounted forty-one fusion motors in a ring
aft of the half-klick snowball. In hours, Base Six had become a warship.
It began accelerating immediately, outward, toward Medina Trading.

 

     Most of Base Six's ships, and the hydrogen they carried, had
traveled only as far as the odd-shaped black bubble Mustapha thought of
as the Storehouse: odd shaped to avoid detection by radar and other
means. Within the Storehouse was a growing store of hydrogen, and a
population of Warriors that did not grow because tournaments kept their
numbers steady

     Now troopships full of Warriors moved to rendezvous with Base Six.
Some would land, some would orbit.

     Base Six was an armed carrier and fuel dump and warship, the heart
of a fleet capable of defending whatever treasure had emerged from Crazy
Eddie's Sister.

 

 

 

     Sinbad accelerated at .8 gravities, comfortable enough for Moties,
not too great a strain on Bury. Behind them the Mote was not much more
than a star. It had a barely discernible disk and was just too bright
for unprotected human eyes. Murcheson's Eye was a dull red smear off
beyond the Mote.

     Four Motie ships, with Eudoxus in the lead; then Sinbad, closely
followed by Atropos; finally, four more Motie warships.

     "That's all I can detect, Captain Renner," Commander Rawlins said.
"I have the general impression there are more ships moving around out
there. We get a sudden detection flash, but nothing we can lock onto.
Like . . . stealthed ships that change shape?"

     "Thank you."

     Sir. We watched the Motie ships during the battle. This gives us
another look."

     "Have any conclusions?"

     "They're pretty good. High performance. We saw nothing but gun
actions, no torpedoes. Their ships tend to be small. We could certainly
defeat any four of what we've seen so far, barring big surprises.''

     "I would not rule out surprises."

     "No, sir, I sure don't. Captain, can you explain what's going on?"

 

     "Do I detect a note of pathos? All right. It's time for a council
of war while we have secure communications." Renner thumbed the
intercom. "Please have Lieutenant Blaine come up, and if His Excellency
is up to a conversation, he ought to listen in.

     "Rawlins, we're not going to Mote Prime. They're out of it. The
important players are all offplanet civilizations, and there are a lot
of those. The one that was best prepared for the new I-point is Medina
Trading, ruled by Caliph Almohad, and his chief negotiator is Eudoxus,
the Mediator we're following, all names chosen by Eucloxus. Okay so far?"

     "Yes, sir. Who are we fighting?"

     "There are a whole bunch of factions." Renner's fingers danced. "I
made notes. Here."

     "Got it." Rawlins's eyes focused offstage. "Oh boy."

     "And that's just the important ones."

     "Khanate's got the comet . . nobody cares . . . the Tartars hold
the new Jump point, and a ship . . . oh, my God."

     Yeah. Hecate is a civilian ship piloted by the Honorable Frederick
Townsend with Chris Blaine's sister, Glenda Ruth Fowler Blaine, aboard
as passenger"

     "Oh, my God. Captain, Lord Blaine isn't going to be happy about
that! Are we going to rescue them?"

     "Could we?"

     Rawlins was quiet for a moment. "I don't know, but I'd sure as hell
hate to go back without trying."

     "I see your point, but Eudoxus doesn't ships even with yours. Right
now the best safe, and our Motie allies are trying to deal while, we're
headed for a Medina Traders was a joint base with East India Trading,
been a readjustment of that alliance."

     "Readjustment?'

     "That's the word Eudoxus used.'

     "Somebody else to fight?"

     "Maybe."

     Chris Blaine came to the bridge and took a place near Renner.

     Commander Rawlins said, "Are things usually this complicated with
Moties? Captain, what the hell is our objective?"

     "Good question," Renner said. "First is to survive. Second, get
Glenda Ruth Blaine back. She's got a cargo that may change things...may
affect our third objective, which is bringing order out of chaos."

     "Cargo?"

     Rennor said, "Lieutenant Blaine?"

     "Yes, sir. As Captain Renner said, there's another objective to
consider. The Moties are loose, and that's got to be dealt with, by us
or a battle fleet."

     "Only there's no battle fleet." Renner sighed. "Okay, Chris. The
cargo." Renner caught Cynthia's eye; he negotiated for coffee.

     Blaine nodded. "Commander Rawlins, just how much do you know about
Moties?'

     "Not much. I skipped the classes on Motie society back in the
blockade squadron. Studied their tactics, but I didn't see any need to
understand them, since all we were supposed to do was kill them."

     "Yes, sir. You must have a crewman who was that curious. Find him.
Meanwhile, I lecture."

     "To begin with, we all know Moties are a strongly differentiated
species. Masters are the only Motie class that really counts; whereas
the Mediators do all the communicating. Mediators are so likable that we
tend to forget that they're not really in charge, that they take orders
from Masters

     "But not always," Renner said

     "Okay, consider the three Moties sent to the Empire. Two of King
Peter's Mediators, with an older Master related to King Peter but not
previously in charge of Jock and Charlie. That gave Jock and Charlie
some leeway. They didn't have to obey every order Ivan gave, although
they usually did. There must have been rules, but I never learned them.
Ivan only lasted six years, and then they were on their own.

     "I once asked Jock what Ivan's last orders were. Jock told me, 'Act
in such a way as to decrease the risk to our kind in the long term. Keep
each other sane. Make us look good.' I think she left out considerable
detail. And Mediators would lie to us if Ivan had told them to,

     "So here we are back in Mote system and everything we know is a
little bit wrong. We're dealing with a space civilization, not a planet.
All the Classes will be a little different, some a lot different, even
including the Masters. Motie civilization is old. The asteroids have
been settled for over a hundred thousand years, time enough for
evolutionary changes, and we know the Moties have used radical breeding
programs on themselves as well."

     "Like Saurons," Rawlins said.

     "Well, not really," Renner said. "Different objectives, different
reasons."

     "Yes, sir." Rawlins didn't sound convinced.

     "We've had one piece of luck, maybe," Blaine said. "Horace Bury's
Mediator apparently left King Peter entirely and sold her services to
the highest bidder. Bury-trained Mediators seem to be swapped around out
here like money."

     "Must make His Excellency happy," Rawlins said. "Is that the reason
for all the Arab names they give themselves?"

     Chris's forefinger wagged. "No, no! Skipper, these names were all
chosen by Medina's Bury-trained Mediator, Eudoxus, probably for their
emotional impact on Horace Bury. Tartars are enemies of Arabs. Medina
Traders sounds good to an Arab. Eudoxus was a famous Levantine trader
who operated out of the Red Sea and discovered the original Arab trade
route to India."

     "Ho, ho," Rawlins said. "And of course Bury knew that."

     "Of course. There is another thing. Motie Masters don't really form
societies the way we do. The subordinate classes generally obey the
Masters, but Masters don't have any instinct to obey each other, and
whatever it is about humans that makes us form societies is largely
missing in Masters. Motie Masters will cooperate, and one will take a
subordinate position to another, but as far as I can make out, the only
loyalties are to a gene line. There's no loyalty at all to any
abstraction like an empire, or a city. That's more like an Arab
civilization than it's like the Empire, which may account for the
popularity of Bury Mediators. Mister Bury is likely to understand things
here better than any of us."

     "Including you, Blaine?" Rawlins demanded. "The Word in the fleet
was that you were raised by Moties."

     Somewhat," Chris Elaine said. "We were still in New Caledonia and
my father was on the High Commission until I was six years old. It was
when we got back to Sparta and my parents set up the Institute that I
got to see the Moties every day. Ivan was dead by then, and Glenda Ruth
was just born. She saw a lot more of Jock and Charlie and never met Ivan
at all."

     "Um. Now what about Hecate's cargo?"

     Renner said. "Chris, let me. You've never even seen the Crazy Eddie
Worm. You were on blockade-"

     "Hold it, Captain." There was a snap in Blaine's voice. "Commander
Rawlins, the Worm is a hole card of sorts. Sir, are you sure you want to
know more?"

     Though he was pretty sure lieutenants didn't talk that way to
captains, Renner held his tongue. Rawlins said frostily, "Why wouldn't I
want to know, Lieutenant?"

     'If you know and you talk to Moties, they'll learn it," Blaine
said. "Commander, until you've been around Moties, you just can't
understand how quickly they learn to interpret everything you say or do."

     "I may have an idea," Rawlins said. "A year aboard my ship and
nobody in the wardroom will play poker with you."

     "Yes, sir. They may learn from Captain Renner anyway, but probably
not. He's had more experience dealing with Moties. They won't learn from
His Excellency. Or me."

     "Won't learn what?"

     They turned to see Joyce Mei-Ling coming into Sinhad's lounge. "All
right," Rawlins said. "I'll take your word for it, it's valuable, and
it's better that I don't know about this Crazy Eddie Worm. Captain
Renner, if the objective is to recover Miss Blaine and her cargo, how do
we go about doing it?"

     "That's the question," Renner said.

     "We negotiate." Bury was onscreen. "Forgive me, I was invited to
listen. Commander Rawlins, what is important now is that we appear to be
ready to fight, and that the Moties believe that overwhelming Imperial
forces will come to our rescue in the not too distant future, so that it
is better for the Moties to conclude an agreement with us now while they
still have strength."

     "Yeah. And that they don't learn just how far the Blockade Fleet is
from us. Only it's not so far, sir. Into the Crazy Eddie point and back
with the Squadron."

     "Except that whatever's left there will shoot before listening.
There's no real way to tell a Motie ship from an Imperial," Renner said.
Damn. Of course that's right. And we can't get a message back to
Agamemnon either. Commodore, I'm real glad you're in charge and not me."
Rawlins paused. "One thing, though. Admiral Weigle's in command of the
blockade fleet. He's got to know something has happened. The Jump point
back to New Cal has moved, he damned well will know that, so he'll send
back for orders, fast. Also he'll look for the new Jump point to the Mote."

     "What will he do if he finds it?" Renner asked.

     Rawlins shook his head. "Stand guard over it, I suppose. But you
know, sir, Weigle's an aggressive commander. He just might send a scout.
We'd better watch for that. All right, Blaine, what else don't I know?"

     'A lot, but we don't know it either," Chris Blaine said. "For
example. These space civilizations are more like nomads than anything
settled. No stable maps, no permanent homes. A few, like the ones in the
big planetary moons, are relatively fixed, but mostly things shift and
change. The value of . . . air, food, power, machinery, anything that
has to be moved, it depends on distance and delta-vee. It changes every
second. There must be ways to sell delta-vee

     Hah," Rawlmns said. "As if the old Silk Routes changed distances.
One day it's like walking across a river bridge to get to Far

Cathay. Next month it's thousands of miles away"

     "It was like that!" Joyce exclaimed. "When things were stable and
there were strong governments, it was only a few weeks from Persia to
China, but when the nomads were strong and bandits blocked the passes,
it could be months or years, or no land routes at all. And there were
pirate empires in Viet Nam and Sumatra, so even the sea routes weren't
stable."

     "An interesting observation," Bury said. "Which may do much to give
us new understanding of these Moties. Thank you, Joyce. Kevin, perhaps
we should assume these Moties are more similar to bedouin Arabs than to
your Empire."

     "Wonderful," Renner said. "The only Arabs I know are you and Nabil."

     "Face," Joyce said. "Arabs are concerned with saving face, even
more than Chinese. Appearances are very important. Maybe to the Moties,
too?"

     "I didn't notice that on Mote Prime," Renner said. "But maybe I
wouldn't have. But- You know, they did have stories about everything.
The paintings, the statuary, they made up stories to hide their past,
and they did put the best face they could on things. On the other hand
it occurs to me that Chris and Glenda Ruth, me, all of us only knew Mote
Prime Moties. Which means none of us are real experts."

     "Except His Excellency," Chris Blaine said. "Look at how valuable
Bury Mediators are. Of course they're expecting the Empire to be much
more like Mr. Bury sees it than as we do."

     "As 1 saw it nearly thirty years ago, Lieutenant," Bury said.

     "Damnation," Rawlins said. "Commodore, this is way over my head.
Only thing I'm sure of, if we let something happen to Lord Blaine's
daughter, my career is finished. Well, I guess I know what to do, keep
the guns and torpedoes ready and wait for orders. Commodore, you tell me
what to shoot at, I'll try to shoot it, but I sure don't know any more
than that!"

     "Join the club. Signing off." Renner thumbed the switch,

     Joyce turned to Chris Blaine. "All right, what's the Crazy Eddie Worm?"

     "I can't tell you," Chris said.

     She turned to Renner. "The deal was, I learn everything. Now you're
going back on that?"

     Chris Blaine said. "Joyce, do you want to be forbidden to talk to
Moties?"

     "No, of course not. And you can't do that!"

     "We can't do that. Joyce, we can't fall thirty stories unless
somebody's pushed us off a balcony! There are things you can't know. If
you know them, you can't talk to Moties because then the Moties would
know them, too.

     She didn't believe him, not even when Kevin nodded at her.

 

 

     "Kevin!"

     Renner vaguely knew he was asleep, and someone to wake him, and he
didn't care.

     "Come on, Kevin. Come on, open the bloody circuit. Your attention
please, Captain Renner. God damn it, Kevin-"

     "Yeah? Buckman? What?"

     "It's a message from nowhere, Kevin, nowhere we know anyway. I just
got it."

     "Message from nowhere. Important. What is it?"

     "It was a general broadcast, wide beam. Must have cost a lot of
power to send. Kevin, there's a cover message and a complete library of
astronomy for the past hundred thousand years! More, I think! You were
asleep, so before I woke you I did some tests. I sampled their
observations to see how they match the New Caledonia database over the
past few hundred years. It all verifies, all I tested does anyway.
Kevin, I think you've got to do something about this. Oh, and
Phidippides wants to talk. Atropos wants to talk."

     "Yeah." Renner found his uniform and wrestled his legs into it.
"Verification. Well?"

     "Loci for some of the more obvious stars check out. I started a
program to verify the orbits of Murcheson's Eye and the Mote. Then I
came and got you. It should be finished by now."

     "Okay, let's go." He squeezed through the curtain. "Hello, Horace.
You're looking well this morning. Cynthia, we need breakfast, large,
served at our posts." Into his acceleration couch. "Jacob, first show me
that message. Then you can get me Atropos."

     "It's this file."

     The message was printed out on Kevin's screen, but it gave the
impression of being written on a scroll:

 

     "Greetings, 0 Caliph from afar, from the newest of your servants.
You may think of us as the Library at Alexandria; our locus is described
in this vector. We give you this record of all of our history's
observations of this region of the sky. We have watched the skies for
countless ages, and we offer all this to you that you will be pleased
with us and know how useful we can be. Remember us, 0 Caliph, when you
come into your kingdom."

 

     Renner was at a loss for words. Not so Bury: "This tells us many
things," he said, "not the least of which is that they have a Bury
apprentice Mediator."

     "What else?"

     "They know nothing of us. They're powerless and poor. They have no
way to engage in dialogue with us, which may imply that they fear
Medina, or that they are light-hours away."

     "Both, I'd say," Blaine said. "But they're certainly a long way off
towards Mote Gamma. They've got good detection. They broadcast across
just over two billion kilometers. Even so, they must be
poverty-stricken, or they would have sent something, if only a relay to
project a narrower beam."

     Bury dreamed, his face calm and perfectly still. "Yes. As is, look
what they've done. They've spilled their secrets across the sky. They've
given away all they had because there was no way to establish a trade.
Perhaps the strangers are not strangers to gratitude. Exactly right, for
those with no power at all."

     "Thanks-"

     "There is more. They believe we are powerful, or likely to become
so. This argues that others do also. The question is, why? Certainly we
are not now."

     "Thanks, Horace. Buckman, what have you got?"

     "New program just finishing. Their orbits for the Eye and the Mote
check against what I've got, with a minor margin of error."

     "A hundred thousand years of observations?"

     "That, or two or three."

     'Okay get me-"

     "Wait one, Kevin. This is finished. Mmm

     Renner watched Buckman dreaming before his screen and presently
said, "See if you can describe it," biting off the words.

     "Yeah. It's a reiterative program to predict the collapse of
Buckman's Protostar, Kevin, at first blush it looks like Medina Trading
should have had this. It would have given them the right date

year. I mean this is really, seriously valuable "Okay. Get me Atropos"

     "Yes, sir, we received a copy, too," Rawlins said. "It came from an
asteroid that trails the Beta Leading Trojans."

     "Onk?"

     "Beta Leading Trojans, sir-"

     "Right, I understand that."

     "Well, there's an asteroid that trails that group. The group is
sixty degrees in front of Mote Beta."

     "Naturally."

     "And this is maybe fifty degrees from Beta."

     "Unstable. Had to be nudged, right, Jacob? Anything else, Rawlins?"

     "Yeah, my Sailing Master is a science buff, and he hasn't stopped
playing with that since he got it."

     Eudoxus's sneer was clear and blatant, if hard to describe.
"'Library at Alexandria,' forsooth! Their claim would have been valid
once. They're near broken, now. They still had some of their wealth ten
years ago."

     "That would be when they bought a Bury Mediator," Kevin surmised.

     The Motie didn't visibly react. "Yes, they bought their Bury
Fyunch(click) from Persia. They were maintaining their ancient tradition
of collecting and codifying knowledge. Perhaps they still are.

     "They're the oldest family we know of. They've traded in
information throughout history. They've had to move countless times.
They were in the Leading Trojans of Beta eight thousand years ago, at
the killing of the Doctors."

     "We heard of that," Renner said. Something made him add, "No, I
guess we didn't

     "Was there a Killing of the Doctors on Mote Prime? I'm not
surprised," Eudoxus said. "It must seem so obvious. Doctors make
population problems worse, yes?"

     "Obvious, right,"

     "Here it was very successful. Alexandria refused to participate and
so did some other forgotten civilizations; they must all have been
destroyed by the victors. Alexandria alone kept their Doctors. Afterward
they bred a basic stock and sold crossbreeds and tailored mutations. But
other cultures have sequestered their own breeding stock, Doctors and
other rare castes, and Alexandria has fallen on hard times."

     "Should we be dealing with them?" Renner asked. He noticed Bury's
attention fully on the screen.

     "It does no harm," Eudoxus said. "They are considered-a bit
strange. But they're no threat, and they can be useful."

     Bury was nodding to himself. When Renner broke the connection with
Eudoxus, Bury said, "Interesting. Strange. No threat. Librarians. Kevin,
this group is poor, but it is permitted to keep its resources." He
smiled softly, "Whatever our final decisions, they should include
Alexandria."

 

     "Okay, we're closing on it," Buckman said. He image on the screen:
a dark object surrounded by And now Eudoxus is relaying a better picture."

     The Motie ship had run on ahead and was nearly Motie base. The
screens showed a ring of fusion fire linking black candle flames: fusion
rocket motors, forty or more, bright enough to wash out the sensors.

     The light washed out some detail, but. . . the motors ringed one
side of a highly regular iceball. Most of the iceball was webbed in
colored lines and studded here and there with domes connected by bright
bands on the surface. Some of the domes were transparent. There were
ships, too, scores of them on the ice and in the space around it.

     The instruments aboard Atropos were superior to what Sinbad
carried. A man aboard Atropos was relaying data. "Mass: sixtyfive
thousand tonnes. One klick by half a klick by half a klick. Albedo:
ninety-Six percent."

     "My God, it's huge," Renner said. "Not so bloody big for a comet,
but it's not a comet anymore. It's a carrier spacecraft! Joyce, did the
Empire ever build-"

     The image became a black ball with only the engine-glare
protruding. The proprietors had closed the Field.

     Eudoxus appeared. "That's Inner Base Six," she said. "Maneuver to
the gripping side in this plane

     From Atropos: "The surface is foamed hydrogen ice. We think the
interior is hydrogen ice; the mass is about right. The jets are hydrogen
fusion with some refinements."

     Renner said, "The Crazy Eddie Probe looked bigger than that. Way
bigger, but it turned out to be only a lightsail. I remember before we
found that out, Captain Blaine was wondering if we'd have to land on it
with Marines."

     "This time we do land, I think," Horace Bury said.

 

     Half an hour later, Sinbad was close enough to feel the iceball's
minuscule gravity. "Here goes," Renner said.

     "Yes, sir," Commander Rawlins said. "Sir, I agree it's best to get
Sinbad under a powerful Langston Field, but I won't be sorry to keep
Atropos out here where I can maneuver, Captain, they've got a lot of
ships and guns in there. There's no way I could force them to let you out."

     "Right," Renner said

     "We can presume that Hecate's crew are in similar circumstances,"
Blaine said.

     "The Moties of Mote Prime were gracious hosts," Bury said.

     We believe these Moties are even more similar to Arabs."

     "Yeah. Well, it's one way to find out if Moties have the same ideas
about hospitality that Arabs do," Renner said.

     "As Allah wills. I am ready, Kevin."

 

     The black shield disappeared. Sinbczd sank toward Base Six.
Phidippides moved ahead, veering away toward its own mooring.

     Chris pointed. "I think that must be ours."

     Renner laughed. "Yeah. My God, it's a mosque."

     It was magnificent. It was human, the only shape down there that
wasn't utilitarian and alien. Light and airy, a bubble of painted
masonry afloat on the ice field. The structure couldn't have been
marble; it might well have been carved ice. It was far more mosquelike
than the castle King Peter's people had built them on Mote Prime, and
considerably smaller. A mosque with a cavity in it . . . a vertical
channel or well, from which cables were even now snaking toward Sinbad.

     The black Field closed over the black sky: the stars disappeared.
Atropos, on station well away from Base Six, was now out of
communication. Renner felt Sinbad's vulnerability.

     Sinbad was winched toward the well in the Mosque. It would fit exactly.

     "Close fit," Buckman said. "After what we saw on Mote Prime, there
isn't much Motie Engineers can do that would surprise me- looks like
they have transfer bays matching the airlocks."

     Sinbad was pulled inexorably into the docking bay. Those transfer
bays were unfinished, mere holes. And Motie Engineers were waiting in
the bays, prepared to finish them on the spot.

     Fuel began to flow into Sinbad. Good: they'd kept that promise.

     It was nearly an hour before the Moties finished connecting Sinbad
to an antenna extended through the restored Field. By then Renner was
savage with impatience. He pulled himself under control-because if he
didn't, Rawlins wouldn't!-and said, "Atropos, this is Sinbad. Testing."

     "Atropos here, sir. Locked on. Stand by for-"

     "I'm here," said Rawlins.

     "Right. Commander, we can figure that anything said monitored by
the Moties. I want you to keep testing this circuit.Be sure we have
communications."

     "Yes, sir. And if we don't?'

     "Try to reestablish, but the instant you're out of touch with
Sinbad, you're in command. Do what you think best. You'll recall the
last orders you got from Balasingham. Of course you'll stay at
full-alert status unless I tell you to stand down,"

"Yes, sir. Understood. Do you expect real trouble, Captain Renner?"

"Not from here. I think the Moties here will be perfect hosts. Of course
they told us they had a major readjustment of their relationship with
the East India Company. That sounded sticky"

"Yes, sir."

"And I'll try to find out what that involved. I'll leave the circuits
open on standby." Renner touched switches. "And that's done. Horace, I
think it's time. Joyce, do you really want to carry-"

"It only masses eight kilograms." Joyce hefted the gyro-stabilized
pickup camera. It wriggled within its sleeve like a thing alive.

Renner touched indicators: inner lock, override, outer lock. Sinbad's
air-lock doors swung in and out . . . on a corridor decorated in Moorish
abstracts, and good air with a trace of chemicals in it.

 

 

     Chris Blaine waited impatiently as Eudoxus explained to Horace
Bury. "We really don't have room for your Warriors to accompany us," she
said. "Of course you don't expect to be escorted by Warriors any more
than I do, but a Master of your importance would. My Master will have
his Warriors present when you meet."

     "It is no matter." Bury waved to indicate Blaine, Cynthia, Nabil,
and Joyce. "My friends will have to substitute. In future years we will
find new Customs for meetings between humans and Moties."

     "Thank you." Eudoxus paused. "There's another small matter.

     We're hoping you won't need your travel chair, Excellency. But we
can rebuild the corridors if we must."

     Bury smiled. "You are gracious hosts. Thank you, but for the moment
Nabil can carry a portable medical unit that will suffice for my needs.
Lead on."

     "All right. Kevin."

     "I'd better stay in contact with Atropos," Renner said. He was
captain; he could not leave his ship.

     The corridors bustled with activity. There were Engineers and
Watchmakers everywhere. Blaine glanced over Nabil's shoulder at Bury's
medical readouts. Calm. Total calm. Perhaps even frighteningly calm.

     They entered a dome, a flattened sphere. Through a forest of vines
they looked out on the surface. White snow, pastel domes, lines in
primary colors. And-Joyce looked behind her, then dashed that way and
pointed her pickup camera between two masses of dark greenery.

     The Mosque was magnificent. Joyce held for a moment, then zoomed on
Sinbad, its single minaret, the piece that made it an artistic whole.
She said, "We'll want to go out."

     "No problem," Eudoxus said. "Your viewers would feel cheated if
they couldn't see it all. Sensory deprivation?"

     Joyce only nodded. An instant later she stumbled.. . as she saw how
much she was telling Eudoxus about herself. Chris let his grin show through.

     Now the corridor dipped beneath the ice. Branches ran off to the
sides and up. Here and there were discreet vertical slits, like arrow
notches in an ancient keep. Narrower tubes crossed the corridor above
head height. Moties popped through these like leaves in a storm.

     Down they went, deep into the interior of Base Six.

     The corridor opened into a large chamber. Two grotesque shapes
stood by a door at the far end. Chris saw Eudoxus's tension as they
passed inside. He looked behind him and was not terribly surprised to
see two more of the spiky horrors

     "Warriors," Joyce muttered. "Frightening efficiency, almost
beautiful." She waved her pickup

     Nabil and Cynthia were on hair triggers.

     One of the Warrior shapes moved to open the door. They were
escorted into another large chamber. A white Motie nursed a pup at the
far end. To that one's left stood two Warriors, and to their left was
another white and a brown-and-white.

     Eudoxus spoke rapidly in a language the humans didn't understand.
The other Mediator instantly interrupted with splayed arms and an angry
bark.

     "Hracht! Our Masters spoke that this talk will speak in Anglic,"
that one said. He seemed unaware that he had the full, dangerous
attention of every Warrior in the room. "Then we speak these same
thoughts in the trade language. Need is sorrowful, but given recent
change in levels, we demand. Else East India Trading Company will not
act for you or with you."

     Eudoxus gave the impression of bowing. "Very well. I have the honor
to present His Excellency Horace Hussein al-Shamlan Bury, Magnate of the
Empire, director of the Imperial Traders Association. Your Excellency,
my Master, Admiral Mustapha Pasha. Our associate Master of the East
India Company, Lord Cornwallis. The young mediator who speaks for Lord
Cornwallis may be called Wordsworth." Eudoxus gestured to his master.

     Mustapha spoke slowly and carefully.

     "Excellency, welcome to Inner Base Six," Eudoxus translated. "In
the name of the Caliph Almohad, who sends her greetings. This is your
house."

     "Thank you," Bury said. "You are gracious hosts." He bowed slightly
to both Motie masters, then nodded to Chris Blaine.

     "I will speak for His Excellency," Blaine said. "We wish again to
thank you for your hospitality, and to assure you we understand that the
need for haste was the cause of our coming here with less than full
understanding."

     Joyce moved to one side so that she could see everyone. Her pickup
wriggled in her hands and made a tiny whirring sound. One of the
Warriors started a rapid movement that was halted by a short bark from
Admiral Mustapha.

     Chris Blaine turned to the other Mediator. "Wordsworth, please
assure Lord Cornwallis that we are pleased to meet him."

     "Her," Wordsworth said. "Medina speakers tell humans are usually
hurrying. Is true?"

     "Often," Blaine said.

     "Then forgive me if we talk important things now," Wordsworth said.
"Do you know what your hosts do to us? We were guests, and betrayed. The
half of us are dead, torn by flying bits of metal, ripped apart by no air-"

     "You were not guests by any choice of ours," Eudoxus said. "As all
here are well aware. You forced yourselves into an alliance, and you did
not do your part. Your incompetence has brought the Empire here. Twill
demonstrate." Eudoxus turned to Blaine. "Tell us how your Empire knew to
come to Crazy Eddie's Sister when you did'

     "The token ships. Mere shells," Blaine said. "They could have but
one purpose."

     "Exactly," Eudoxus said. "Had East India sent substantial ships,
the Empire would not have guessed, and our ships would be well into
Imperial space."

     "Where are the ships now?" Wordsworth asked. Our embassy to humans,
do they live or die? I ask the humans to answer."

     No Motie ships have been destroyed," Elaine said. "One hides in the
asteroids of the red dwarf. The others wait with an Imperial cruiser for
escort by the main battle fleet."

     "And East India's representative?"

     "You will forgive us, but until this moment we did not knowthat
East India had representatives aboard those ships," Blaine    said.

     Eudoxus spoke slowly in a language of emphatic consonants: like
popcorn popping. Her white-furred Master listened carefully, then spoke
in the same language.

     Admiral Mustapha says that both the East India Mediators are safe.
There would be no reason to harm them. The Mediators aboard our ships
had orders to keep contact with the Empire to a minimum until they could
speak with someone in high authority. At that time the East India
Mediators will be given the rights we agreed on."

     Wordsworth looked to Chris Elaine. "Does he tell true? No powerful
Empire person was there, far side of Sister?"

     "Captain Renner and His Excellency were the highest authorities
present."

     "Thank you. I must ask now, what have you agreed withMedina?"

     Blaine looked to Bury, then back. "We agreed to come with them. I
think it is no secret that we expected to be taken to Mote Prime. Before
we could find our balance"-he had almost said footing-'one of our ships
and the Sister had both been lost to the Crimean Tartars. Medina has
agreed to assist in rescuing the crew and passengers of Hecate. This
seems fair. Their duplicity caused our loss."

     "Can you speak for your Empire?"

     'No, but if all of us here are agreed, that will have great
influence. I am Kevin Christian Blaine, son of Lord Roderick Blaine.
Commodore Renner has influence with the Navy. His Excellency controls
the directors of the Imperial Traders Association. Joyce Mei-Ling
Trujillo speaks for the news services, Empire-wide. What we agree to
will be heard at all levels of the Empire."

     Wordsworth asked, "How do we stand, measured along Medina Trading?
Have Medina told you? Is there agreement about us, you and Medina Trading?"

     "No. We were told that you were partners with Medina, and that a
readjustment of status was being negotiated.'

     "I do not understand."

     "That you and Medina are partners now talking about changes in
agreements."

     "That is spoke with massive delicacy," Wordsworth said. He spoke
slowly to his Master and received a lengthy reply. "We can agree to
readjustment," Wordsworth said. "We know we do not have equals with
Medina, but we insist we be heard in all discussions."

     "You are not in a position to insist," Eudoxus said

     Wordsworth gave the Motie equivalent of a shrug. "For us has been
worse. Crimean Tartars flee from their former ganglords. They need to
know. They need friends. How if they come to us for refuge? If they
carry to us human guests and gripping hand on the Sister to trade? We-"

     "You could not."

     "Medina lost the Crazy Eddie point because too many Masters, too
little wealth, move in awkward orbits." Resources badly handled, Chris
translated . . . tentatively. "Was bad mistake. Do not do it again. East
India yet has wealth like yours in mass. Crimean Tartars do not know
value of what they took. East India can work with Crimean Tartars and
humans, or we can work with humans, or we can work with humans and
Medina. What do you wish?"

     The silence that followed was not empty. Warriors and Mediators and
Masters shifted constantly: handholds and footholds, positions,
flickering fingers and arms. Chris let it run for several seconds; but
he couldn't read the silence, so he broke it.

     "What is it you're dividing? Do you know?"

     "Access to the Empire and the stars beyond our own," Eudoxus said
instantly.

     "Your Fyunch(click)'s student's third student tells us Empire would
agree with all Moties," Wordsworth said. "All, never less. A stepping .
. . a hierarchy of sorts would look good to you, yes? So, we speak, we
mediate, we argue for command over Mote system, too. Some Motie families
will control Mote system. We wish will be part of families."

     "The highest possible stakes," said Eudoxus. Before Chris or anyone
could answer-if he had had an answer-both Mediators had turned to talk
to their respective Masters.

     Joyce whispered, "At least they agree on that."

     Blaine nodded. He was more interested in getting Horace Bury's
reaction. Bury caught the query (eyebrow lift, tilt of head) and said,
"There's motive here for an arbitrarily large number of murders."

     Eudoxus's head and shoulders suddenly snapped around to face Joyce
Trujillo. "What do you know of our breeding habits?"

     Chris considered throwing his arm across her face. Too bloody late
. . . and it would have told the Mediators what he knew. Eudoxus didn't
even wait for her answer, only for the emotions that chased across her
face. "So. Yow.would deal with the Moties united. How can you expect us
to stay united? Our histories tell that we've tried to unite before, and
failed always."

     'Neither problems nor opportunities last forever," Bury said. "And
what neither Moties nor humans can do, Moties and humans together may
accomplish. Allah is merciful."

     "King Peter's ambassadors must have told you much," Eudoxus said.
"What happened to them?"

     "They were well treated," Joyce said. "One was still alive a few
years ago, as I remember. At the Blaine Institute. Lieutenant Blaine
could tell you more."

     "As His Excellency says, everything has changed," Blaine said.
"When there was one point to blockade, and that one easily defended,
blockade was an effective way to gain time. Now there are two paths to
block. There must be a better way, better for humans and Moties. If not

     "Your battle fleets will come," Eudoxus said. "War in the Mote
system, and you to exterminate us. Bloody hands forever, but else we
escape to the rest of the universe. That is your terror." She had spoken
truth; she must have seen it in their faces. "Our numbers increase. Our
domains. In a thousand years we enclose you. Yes, we must seek a better
answer."

 

 

 

 

PART 4 THE CRAZY EDDIE WORM

 

 

Take up the White Man's burden-

Send forth the best ye breed-

Go bind your sons to exile

To serve your captives' need:

 

The ports ye shall not enter,

The roads ye shall not tread,

Go make them with your living,

And mark them with your dead!

-Rudyard Kipling

"The White Man's Burden"

"The United States and the Philippine Islands, 1899"

 

 

1 The Tartars

 

 

Knowledge is valuable when charity informs it.

 

-St. Augustine, City of God

 

 

Through the windows they could see the beheaded corpse of Hecate.

     A scar gaped along half its length: the gap where Hecate's cabin
had been. The rest of the hull had been mounted alongside a silver
sausage, one of their captors' ships. It flew three hundred meters
distant, keeping pace with their own captor. A slender spine projected
aft. The drive flame was a faint violet-white glow running along the spine.

     Hecate's severed cabin rode the flank of another such sausage. From
inside they could see almost nothing of that: just a silver membrane
bulging with fluid, centimeters away, and a rigid cabin forward.

     But they saw Hecate's host ship well enough. Freddy had set their
remaining telescope to following it. The sausage was banded with
color-coded lines and chains of handholds and catwalks, and Moties. The
maze ran round Hecate, too. Moties in pressure suits moved over the hull
like lice

     They found the lightsail, Freddy's spinnaker. In minutes they had
spread several acres of silver film to inflate ahead of the nose.

     "That won't add much to the thrust," Jennifer said. "Why . . .

     "Why not? It's there," Terry Kakumi said. "Blink and it's a signal
device, blink again and it's heat shielding. They do love to fiddle."

     "It'll heat their cabin some," Freddy said.

Hecate rotted before their eyes. Engineers and tiny Watchmakers stripped
away sections of hull and plated them over their own ship. They found
automated cameras at nose and tail and amidships, an officially approved
model, all identical, which the Moties seemed to find confusing.
Hecate's fuel tank they studied and then left intact. They worked inside
the cut end until the Engineer was able to pull loose a glass tank
festooned with tubing- "Dammit. That's our sewage recycling system,"
Freddy said.

"We'll starve."

"We have the goodies locker," Jennifer said. "A week's supplies, maybe."

"It's a double time limit. Will the sewage crowd us out before we starve
for lack of basic protocarb? Stay tuned."

     The men were edgy, talking to distract themselves. But Jennifer was
calm, even happy, cradling a six-kilogram alien who clung to her with
three arms, watching her face intently, sometimes trying to imitate the
sounds she made. And Glenda Ruth . . . was frightened when she thought
about it, and frustrated, and uncomfortable; and alive as never before,
playing a game she'd begun learning in the cradle.

     She worked on Freddy's back, running her thumbs along basic
shoulder muscles, probing deep. Freddy subsided with a grunt of
unwilling satisfaction. He asked, "Do you suppose they'll keep the data
cubes? I've got some good recordings of the battle."

     Hecate dwindled. They took half the hull to make a curved mirror to
relay light from the light-sail. Kilometers of wiring went into the nose
of the captor craft. A small craft arrived from somewhere else; some of
the wiring, four cameras, and all of Hecate's little attitude jets went
aboard; the Engineer pilot traded places with a replacement, and away it
went.

     The Moties exposed Hecate's drive; moved it aft; set it to firing.

Then they were all over it, tuning, testing. Presently their own drive
went off, leaving Hecote's running.

 

     "Something of a compliment," Glenda Ruth said. Freddy nodded.

     Jennifer asked, "Does it bother you? Hecate..."

     Freddy's shoulders set hard. He said, "Not all that much. A racing
yacht, we change anything at the slightest excuse. The idea's to win.
It's not like-to Glenda Ruth-"not like your dad losing his battleship,
his first command."

     "He still flinches if you mention MacArthur." Glenda Ruth resumed
trying to soften the knots in Freddy's shoulders.

     They could hear the rustling. Engineers and Watchmakers were moving
over the surface of their own life bubble. What was happening out there?

     "Then again, I-iecate is where you and I got together. I do hate-"

     "The bed's quite safe."

     His tension softened. "We get it back from Balasingham, we can
build a ship around it."

     The Mediator pup looked into Jennifer's eyes and said, distinctly.
"Go eat." Jennifer let go, and the pup pushed off from Jennifer's chest,
setting her rotating, sailing unerringly to impact the Engineer.

     The cabin was aswarm with Moties. The Warrior would remain in place
for minutes at a time, then bound about the cabin like a spider on
amphetamines, and presently come to rest again. The Engineer and three
skinny half-meter Watchmakers, and a slender creature with a harelip and
long, delicate fingers and toes, had reshaped the hole in the cabin wall
into an oval airlock. The Engineer had found the safe near the cabin's
forward cone, tapped at the code readout, then left it alone. Now the
Moties had peeled the cabin walls away and were going through the air
and water regeneration systems. From time to time there came a whiff of
chemical strangeness.

     "Too many of them. They'll strain the air changers," Freddy said.

     "I think that one's a doctor," Jennifer said. "Look at the fingers.
And the Motie nose is in the roof of the mouth. That thing's got
enhanced smell and surgeon's fingers. There was a Doctor caste on Mote
Prime."

     "Maybe several."

     "Right. And between them, the Doctor and the Engineer are going to
decide how to keep us alive. I've got to say I don't like that."

     Now the three Watchmakers were moving about the cabin drawing green
lines. They squeezed the stuff out of what the Navy would have called
ration tubes. The patterns weren't complex enough to be writing. The
Watchmakers covered the walls with lines and curves, and presently
converged where the sewage recycling system had been.

     Freddy asked, "Why not, Jennifer? The way you and Glenda Ruth talk,
these Moties can do anything, including keep humans healthy."

     "But it's all very basic, isn't it? Nothing like the castle they
built for us on Mote Prime."

     "It's a battle fleet, not a city," Glenda Ruth said.

     Terry Kakumi snapped, "It's a poor little pathetic battle fleet,
Look at them, Jennie. Tiny little ships, mostly tank, big cabins because
there are too many of the buggers, motors that do a meter per sec
squared at best. What's left for weapons? Are they supposed to make them
on the spot?

     "What would a real fleet be like, Jennie? Rape my lizard, what
couldn't we build with Motie Engineers at the Yards? They're church-rat
poor. We've been captured by BuReloc transportees! They're stripping our
car and fixing our life support with borrowed chewing gum and string!"

     Jennifer giggled. "Bag ladies with borrowed chewing gum. I love it!"

     Glenda Ruth felt herself bristling, as if these were her Moties.
But she could feel it: Terry was right. "What can we do?"

     "Talk to them, Glenda Ruth. Tell them we're worth the price of
their last coin," Terry said. "Tell them to pull the pea out from all
those mattresses, I'm just a pathetic mass of bruises. Explain ransom to
them. Or they'll let us strangle."

     She said, "These don't talk. We'll have to wait."

 

 

     The new East India Mediator was old, as old as Eudoxus, with gray
streaks at the muzzle and along the flanks. She was escorted into the
chamber by a Warrior and a younger Mediator, who both left quickly.

     When she was presented to Horace Bury, the trader flinched. Chris
Blaine moved closer and saw what the Motie was carrying. "A newborn?" he
asked, and watched Bury relax. Of course Bury took it for a Watchmaker.

     The aged Mediator examined the humans and turned toward Bury
radiating delighted surprise. "Excellency! I had never dared hope to
meet you in person, even when it became known that you were again in the
Mote system. I have thought long on the name I would give myself and
have chosen Omar rather than something more pretentious. It is my
greatest pleasure finally to meet you."

     Bury bowed slightly. "I am pleased to have had such apt students."

     "And my new apprentice. We have not chosen a name, but-"

     "You presume," Eudoxus said. "We too have new apprentices, and we
are eager to introduce them to His Excellency."

     Of course." Omar turned to Wordsworth and began to speak.

     "Hracht!" Eudoxus looked pleased. "We agreed that all conversation
will be in Anglic. This means yours as well, does it not?"

     Wordsworth was about to speak, but some gesture from Omar silenced
her. "I would prefer rigid rules to no rules," Omar said. "Very well, I
will receive my information for all to hear. Where do matters stand now?"

     "Not good not bad," Wordsworth said. "We make progress, agree that
East India will have honored place, second to Medina but only to Medina."

     The Mediator pup was staring intently at Horace Bury. The trader
was not annoyed. Interesting...

     "Progress indeed," Omar said. "And how will all this be accomplished?"

     Chris Blaine smiled thinly. "Not all details have been resolved,"
he said. "Yet we can agree, there has never been a better time to unite
all Moties. Mote Prime is not a factor. The Empire has many ships. With
Medina and East India, and allies you may bring..."

     Omar moved closer to Bury. The Mediator pup stretched toward him.
Absently Bury's hand reached out, touched the pup's fur, drew back.

     "Excellency," Omar said. "Let us speak seriously. Medina and East
India are powerful if united, yet it must be obvious to all that even
united we are not the greatest power among the space dwellers."

     "King Peter wasn't the most powerful Master on Mote Prime," Chris
Blaine said.

     Bury spoke softly. "Medina and East India were the first to
understand the implications of the protostar. Your ships even now
negotiate with the Empire. Why should you not have the rewards of
prescience?" He deliberately scratched behind the pup's oversize ear.
"May I choose a name? Ali Baba, I think." Bury smiled. "Of course there
is a small favor we require."

     Eudoxus said, "We have begun to speak with the Crimean Tartars. It
goes slowly. They know only obsolete languages."

     "Obsolete to you," Omar said. "Not to us. One of my sisters has
spoken with the Tartars, and I received word moments before I landed
here. Excellency, the Tartars are afraid. They find that every Motie's
hand is against them, and they do not know what they have. Only that it
is important, and holding it is dangerous."

     "They're holding a wolf by the ears," Joyce said.

 

 

     The hull clonked

     In Hecate's cabin, they waited.

     A Warrior bounded through the new air lock, scuttled about the
cabin, and presently settled. It exchanged words with the Warrior
already present. It emitted a warbling whistle.

     Other Moties entered: a Master, a meter and a half tall and clad in
thick white fur, and a smaller Motie furred in a dense brown-and-white
pattern: a Mediator.

     "We're in business," Glenda Ruth said.

     Two Engineers followed, towing a glass cylinder with green
goo sloshing in it: Hecate's sewage recycler. Six-fingered hands had
been at work on it, but it didn't seem greatly changed.

     "Another compliment," Freddy said. "Given what that cost me, I'd
have been surprised if they could make it much more efficient."

     Glenda Ruth felt Freddy's relief; she even shared it. Their life
spans had just been extended by several weeks. More important was the
timing.

     "We thank for glorious gift," she said in the language Jock and
Charlie had taught her, King Peter's language, from Mote Prime.

     The Mediator's stance indicated receptivity but no understanding.

     Damn! But free-fall might alter a Motie's body language.
(Stance,indeed!) Or her words might be wrong, or her own gestures.
How would a crippled Mediator speak, one with a missing arm?

     Two of those little Moties with the Engineers weren't Watchmakers;
they were Mediator pups. Jennifer waved. The larger pup jumped across
ten meters of space, impacted, and clung. Jennifer wasn't having trouble
communicating.

     Okay. Glenda Ruth released her seat belts to give her body full
play, worked her foot under a strap for anchorage, and said, palms
facing out, regal-but-unarmed. "Our lives much improved by generous-"

     The Moties converged on her.

     Glenda Ruth had to remember to resume breathing. She was very aware
of the spiky Warriors. They shifted constantly to keep a free path
between prisoners and weapons. The four humans held quite still as
six-fingered hands moved over them.

     They had guessed this might happen. Glenda Ruth's mother, the only
woman aboard MacArthur, had stripped so that Moties could learn
something of human anatomy. Jennifer wanted that slot for herself.

     It didn't matter. The caste that Jennifer thought was a Doctor
moved in with the Engineer, and they peeled Hecate's crew like bananas.
The humans had to help in self-defense. The Doctor shied back from waves
of alien pheromones, then sniffed dutifully. It had been many hours
since there was a shower aboard Hecate.

     Jennifer blushed and twitched at tickle points. Freddy thought it
was funny and was trying to hide it. Terry's rounded nudity didn't
bother him, but his hyperawareness of the Warriors' guns was driving
Glenda Ruth nuts. She tried not to flinch at the touch of Motie hands.
Dry. Hard. Right hands felt like a dozen twigs gliding over her face,
seeking the muscles that make the front of a human head into a signaling
system. The left hand clamped like a vise to hold her arm or leg or
torso to be probed.

     They turned and twisted for the Doctor. The Mediator and Master
hung back, watching.

     Human vertebrae fascinated them, as they had thirty years before,
when MacArthur's crew met Moties from Mote Prime. Evolution had not
taken that path on the Mote. Motie life-forms had spines of solid bone
and heavy, complex joints.

     The brown-and-white pup jumped from human to human, sniffing,
feeling, comparing. Even the Master, judging it safe, moved forward to
run its right hands along Glenda Ruth's spine. Jennifer collapsed in
giggling that was half sobs, sandbagged by everyone's favorite memory
from Summer Vacation.

     (Outside the museum on Mote Prime, a Master's dozen fingers
explored Kevin Renner's back. Renner shifted in delight. "Right! A
little lower. Okay, scratch right there. Ahh!")

     They couldn't talk under such circumstances. Glenda Ruth tried.
They had to educate the Mediator, give it words to learn . . . but the
others' embarrassment was just too strong. Glenda Ruth quickly gave up.

     The Doctor and Engineer began talking to the Master. Pointing,
demonstrating, explaining. The white-furred Motie took it all in. It
asked short questions (that one inflection, query, brought verbal
responses, where another, command, caused action), and the Moties
resumed their examination. One question sent the Engineer to join its
Watchmakers at work in the air recycler. Another had it comparing Freddy
and Terry, Jennifer and Glenda Ruth. Hands. Hair. Toes. Spines again.
Genitals (will you Stop that giggling?)

     The Mediator watched.

     And finally they were allowed, to put their clothes on. They found
it hard to look at each other. The Master and its attendants were still
talking.

     "We should have guessed," Glenda Ruth said. "Masters do talk. It's
different from the Mediator skill. They have to organize data from a
dozen different castes . . . professions."

     Clothed, it was all right to speak again. Jennifer said, "I think
the Doctor's nearsighted. In a surgeon that's probably good."

     The adult Mediator took the second Mediator pup from its Engineer
parent. She crossed to the bridge, caught herself, and offered the
little Motie to Freddy: clearly an offer, not a demand.

     Freddy looked at Glenda Ruth. He was showing surprise, no distaste,
and a touch of hope. She said, "Take it." Why Freddy? Freddy immediately
reached out, smiling, and accepted the thing into his arms.

Why Freddy? Why not me?

     It clung with five limbs, its hands exploring Freddy's head and
shoulders, where his skin was exposed. Presently it pulled back to watch
his face. Moties caught on to that one quick, the notion of a mobile
face. Why not me, or Terry?

     The Master spoke. The Engineer led the Mediator to the door. The
Mediator began playing with the code readout.

     "Damn," Glenda Ruth said. The others looked at her.

     If she let the others know exactly what she had in mind, a Mediator
would know it now or later. Could she get some help on this? She pointed
at the safe and shouted, "Show signs of distress, dammit! It's too soon!"

     Distress, right. Freddy spasmed, pointed to the safe with an
outflung arm, and flung the other across his averted eyes, crying,
"Weep! Wail!" Glenda Ruth choked back a laugh. The pup was trying to
imitate him, right arms pointing, left across its eyes.

     Terry's hand closed on her ankle. "The Warriors."

     "They-" She looked. They would, "Freddy love, cut it."

     "What was that about?"

     She shook her head. "Anyway, you made the point.

     One of the Warriors scuttled forward and anchored itself next to
the safe, gun pointed back toward the humans.

     The safe door slid open. A Watchmaker scuttled in. It handed out a
laboratory sealed-environment jar as large as itself, then a plastic jar
of dark powder, a stack of documents, a roll of gold coins.

     The Engineer examined the gold and said something to the Master.
The Master answered

     The Engineer put the papers back, and the cocoa. It examined the jar.

     "Don't touch that!" Glenda Ruth shouted. No Motie would understand,
but the Mediator would remember.

     The Engineer opened the seals.

     There was a pop. The Warrior's head snapped around to catch the
same puff of gas that caught the Engineer. Glenda Ruth wondered if they
would be shot.

     The Warriors didn't shoot. The Engineer took a scraping from the
sludge in the jar, then resealed it and put it back. It left the door
open. It spoke a word and tossed the gold at one of the Watchmakers, who
caught it and jumped through the new airlock.

     The other Engineers had reattached the sewage recyling system where
six lines of graffiti-green met in a sunburst. They continued to work on
it, add a pipe here, bend, constrict. The Warriors maintained their
stations. When Glenda Ruth kicked herself forward to the safe, she could
feel phantom bullets. The Warriors came alert; the Master gave no signal
that she could recognize; but no Motie stopped her

     Thanks to the Moties' parsimonious lowering of cabin pressure, the
canister's pressure had sprayed perhaps 10 percent of the encysted eggs
of the Crazy Eddie Worm into the cabin as an aerosol. Most of the
contents were intact. There was a mild odor of petroleum and other
pollutants, the natural state of water on Mote Prime, fading rapidly as
the air filters did their work. The Moties clearly didn't like the smell
any more than the humans did. It wouldn't have bothered planet-dwelling
Moties.

     They've evolved in space, Glenda Ruth thought. Space-dwelling
Moties who don't detest pollution will die of it.

     Glenda Ruth carefully wiped the rim and resealed the canister, and
glared at the Engineer. It might be vital to be able to claim that the
Moties had been infected by accident.

     Then she suppressed a shudder: a hundred wormlets would hatch and
die in her lungs.

     Thirty years before, Whitbread's asteroid-mining Engineer had been
infected with the parasitic worm. MacArthur's biologists determined that
it couldn't infect humans and labeled it Form Zeta, the sixth living
thing they'd found during autopsy on the Engineer. Present, not in large
numbers, but present.

     Jock and Charlie and Ivan carried it in greater numbers, and they
didn't care any more than humans care about E. Coli. Parasite Zeta did
no harm beyond consuming a few calories; which was why the Blaine
Institute biologists had used it as the base for their genetic
engineering experiments.

It would be interesting to know if the parasite was normal among these
space-evolved Moties. Not that it mattered: surely it would live, and
this worm was different. And it would not survive in human lungs, but
just the thought-

The Mediator spoke at her shoulder, and she jumped. It said, "Mediators
talk. No Horace Bury Fyunch(click), but we talk."

"Good," said Glenda Ruth. "Let's talk. Please leave our trade goods
alone. This is all we have to bargain with. It should not be ruined."

And now the Crazy Eddie Worm was growing in an Engineer, a female. Had
the Warrior been female, too? Would it affect these Watchmakers?

How many Masters were aboard? Too many, of course, more than their
captors would actually want, but . . . three? Four? And the clock was
counting down.

 

 

     "Your Lordship's presence is requested," the voice said. "My Lord.
My Lord, I must insist. Rod Blaine, wake up, dammit!"

     Rod sat bolt upright. "All right, already."

     "What is it?" Sally asked. She sat up with a look of concern. "The
children..."

     Rod spoke to the ceiling. "Who?"

     "Lord Orkovsky. He says the situation is urgent," the telephone said.

     Rod Blaine swung his feet over the edge of the bed and found his
slippers. "I'll talk to him in the study. Send coffee." He turned to
Sally. "Not the kids. The Foreign Secretary wouldn't call us in the
middle of the night about that." He went across the hail to his study
and sat at his desk. "I'm here. No visuals. All right, Roger, what's up?"

     "The Moties are loose."

     "How?"

     "Actually, it's not quite that bad." Lord Roger Orkovsky, Secretary
of State for External Affairs, sounded like a diplomat under stress.
"You'll recall there was some question of when Dr. Buckman's protostar
would collapse."

     "Yes, yes, of course."

     "Well, it's happened, and the Moties were ready for it. Due to some
clever thinking-Chris is mentioned in the dispatches-Mercer had sent
everything he could scrape up out to where the new Alderson point would
form, so we were ready, too. Almost ready.

     Details later. We got a whole bunch of reports at once, about
stellar geometry and such. You'll have to read them all. What's
important is that there are some Motie ships with an ambassador on board
cooling their heels under Navy detention while we decide what to do
about them. And Mercer wants a battle fleet."

     Rod was aware that Sally had come up behind him. "Roger," she said.

     "Good morning, Sally. Sorry to yank you up like this-"

     "Are the children all right?"

     "I was just getting to that," Orkovsky said. "We don't know. Chris
volunteered to be Navy liaison aboard Bury's ship-Sinbad.

     Commodore Kevin Renner commanding."

     "Commodore."

     "Yeah, that's complicated, too."

     "So they went into the Mote System," Rod said.

     "Right. Sinbad, a light cruiser-Atropos, Commander Rawlins- and a
Motie ship. The reports say the first person the Moties wanted to talk
to was Horace Bury."

     "Roger, that doesn't make sense," Sally said.

     "Maybe not, but it's true. Look, I better give you the rest of
this. There'll be a cabinet meeting in the Palace in two hours. We want
you there. Both of you. Matter of fact, we want you back on the Motie
Commission. You were going back to New Caledonia anyway, now the
government will pay for getting you there. The Navy will have a ship
ready by the time you get to the Palace."

     "We can't leave so soon!" Rod said.

     "Yes, we can," Sally said. "Roger, thanks. You mentioned Chris.
What about Glenda Ruth?'

     "That was the last message in the stack," Orkovsky said. "Sally, a
hundred hours after Sinbud went into the Mote system, Freddy Townsend
took his yacht through. Glenda Ruth was aboard."

"I want his name," Sally said.

     "Huh?"

     "Whoever let them through. There's got to be a Navy man in charge
out there, and he let our daughter go into the Mote system in an unarmed
yacht. I want his name."

     "Sally..."

     "Yes, I know, he thought he had a good reason."

     "Maybe he did."

     "It wouldn't matter, would it? When was the last time you won an
argument with her? I still want his name. Fyunch(click)!"

     "Yes, madame?"

     "Is our car ready?"

     "Yes, madame."

     "Tell Wilson we'll be leaving in an hour. Get clearances for the
west entrance to the Palace."

     "Yes, madame."

     "So what do we take?" Sally said. "Jock. Fyunch(click), we want to
talk to Jock. Wake him up, but check with the doctors first."

     "Good thinking," Rod said. "Sally, we can't take him with us."

     "No, but we can get him to record something to prove he's still
alive," Sally said.

     "What?" Rod held a sheath of facsimile papers. "The last report
says, and I quote: 'The Hon. Glenda Ruth Blaine, on the basis of brief
conversations with the Motie representatives, has concluded that
although these Moties know Anglic and have some familiarity with the
Empire, they are not part of any Motie group previously encountered.' I
don't think they believe her."

     "More fools they."

     "Madame," the ceiling said. "Jock has been awakened. Do you want
visuals?"

     "Yes, thank you."

     Brown and white fur streaked with gray. "Good morning, Sally. If
you don't mind, I'll have chocolate while we talk."

     "By all means. Good morning. Jock, the Moties are loose."

     "Ah?"

     "You knew about the protostar."

     "I know what you have told me about the protostar. You said that it
would collapse within the next hundred years. I take it that was wrong?
That it has already happened?"

     "You got it," Rod said. "Jock, we have a problem. Moties that
Glenda Ruth believes aren't part of King Peter's group have got out of
the Mote system. So far they appear to be stuck in a red dwarf
backwater, but we all know the Empire can't keep up two blockades."

     "And you and Sally have been given the problem of what to do about
the Moties," Jock said. "Have they made you an admiral yet?"

     "No."

     "They will. And they'll give you a fleet." Jock's hand moved
expressively. "At least it's not Kutuzov. Of course they want you to
leave immediately. I am afraid I cannot accompany you."

     "No, the Jump shock would kill you."

     "Are the children well? They must have involved themselves by now."

     Sally said, "They've gone to the Mote."

     "I did not think you could surprise me," Jock said, "But you have.
I see. Give me an hour. I will make what records I can."

     "In what language?" Rod asked.

     "In several. I will need recent pictures of Chris and Glenda Ruth,
as well as of myself."

     "We have a meeting."

     "Of course. We will discuss this when you're done with that."

The Motie paused, and somehow the Motie smile was a grin of triumph. "So
the horse learned to sing after all."

 

 

     "I hadn't expected this," Jennifer said. "We're infested with
Moties! Freddy . . . Freddy, I can't keep thinking of this ship as Hecate!"

     Freddy Townsend looked around. "Yeah. Hecate's cabin mounted on a
ship of unknown name. Bandit-One? And we'll just hang numbers on the
rest of the fleet."

     Glenda Ruth said, "We could ask-"

     And she shied back before he snarled, "I won't ask Victoria. She'd
give us the name of this Motie ship, like we're strap-on cargo

     Jennifer said, "A two-headed ship. Two captains. We've never seen
the Master that gives the orders. Cerberus?"

     Five Watchmakers, two Warriors, three Engineers nursing two
Mediator pups, the old Mediator they now called Victoria, a Master, a
Doctor, and a lean, spidery variant that scuttled back and forth through
Cerberus's big new airlock, perhaps bearing messages, had all made their
nests in the cabin.

     The change had come gradually, while they slept. Glenda Ruth
remembered waking from time to time in a shifting pattern of variously
shaped Moties. Twelve hours of that, then she woke choking and weeping.
The Doctor had examined them and then meeped at the young male Master
they'd named Merlin, who warbled at the engineers, who readjusted the
air and sewage recyclers until the air was back to standard . . . but it
was still thick with Motie smells, and every human's eyes were still red.

     The green strips painted along the walls had grown into vines,
furry green tubes as thick Glenda Ruth's leg. The various Moties used
the lines to mark off their territories

     They'd turned Cerberus's original airlock into a toilet: one toilet
with a variety of attachments. The Engineers had worked on Cerberus's
original toilet, too. It worked better now

     "They've put screens up. Both toilets," Glenda Ruth "We're talking now

     "Can you tell them to leave us some room?"

     "I'll give it another try, but you can guess the answer. This much
is more personal room than they've ever seen in one spot."

     An Engineer arrived with food. All of the Moties converged except
one Warrior. Glenda Ruth said, "Jennifer, go and see what they're eating."

     The meal was democratic: the young Master called Merlin supervised
distribution and sent a Watchmaker with food for the Warrior on guard.
Merlin looked around when Jennifer came near. Victoria said he was a
young male; this was not obvious, given he was helping to nurse the
Mediator pups. The human presence didn't disturb him. Jennifer looked
about her; spoke a few words to Victoria.

     The Mediator swam to join Glenda Ruth. Victoria had been learning
Anglic much faster than Glenda Ruth could learn Oort Cloud Recent.

     She said, "About food? I think, thought you have your own."

     "I'd like to know if this is like what we eat," she told it.

     "Will ask Doctor and Engineer

     "I would like to feed you cocoa."

     "Why?"

     "On the planet they liked cocoa. If you like cocoa, we have
something to trade."

     "You said, what is in safebox is trade goods. We should not take
without giving. Cocoa in safe?"

     "Yes."

     Victoria brought her flat face close. "Trade space with us! Past
the starhole is all the worlds, all within your gripping hand. Give us
the worlds, take what you want. Take tools you see, tell tools you want,
Engineers make that. Take any caste of us, tell what shape and kind you
want, you wait, your children will have."

     Glenda Ruth said, "This is not so simple. We know how your numbers
grow"

     Stillness.

     "We think we have an answer, but it's still not easy. Many Motie
families will need to work together. As Moties do not always do,"

     "Glenda Ruth, who is Crazy Eddie you speak of?"

     Glenda Ruth was only surprised for a moment. "Planet-dwelling
Moties told us about Crazy Eddie. Maybe you know him with another name."

     "Maybe"

     "Crazy Eddie isn't one person, he is a kind of person. The kind who
. . . who tries to stop change when change is too massive to stop."

     "We tell children about Sfufth, who throws away garbage because it
smells bad."

     "Something like that." Sfufth? Shifufsth? She couldn't quite make
that sound.

     Jennifer had rejoined them, and now she carried the older pup. She
said, "We had a very powerful Master, long ago. Joseph Stalin had the
power of life and death over all of his people, in hundreds of
millions." Jennifer glanced at Glenda Ruth: stop or go? Uncertain,
Glenda Ruth nodded.

     Jennifer went on, "Advisers told Stalin that there was a shortage
of copper tube in his domain. Stalin gave his orders. Everywhere across
a tenth of the land area of our world, what was made of copper was
melted down to make tubes. Communication lines disappeared. Tractor
parts, other tools. Wherever copper was needed, it was made pipes instead."

     "Sfufth. We know him," Victoria said. "Sfufth is found everywhere,
in every caste. Sfufth breeds Watchmakers for sale to other nests. No
need for cage, they take care of selves."

     Jennifer was delighted. "Yes! There's a painting in a museum on
Mote Prime." She was about to convey an unfortunate nuance, and Glenda
Ruth couldn't stop her. "A burning city. Starving Moties in riot. A
Mediator stands on a car to be seen and heard and shouts, 'Return to
your tasks!'

     Victoria nodded head and shoulders. "When possibilities close,
Crazy Eddie doesn't see."

     Glenda Ruth said, "In Stalin's domain, fifty years after. Things
changed. More communication, better tools and transport. Their Warriors
ate half their resources for all that long time, but the weapons they
made were second best. Lesser domains began splitting off. Some older
Masters acted to take charge of the domain and turn it all back. The
Gang of Crazy Eddies."

     Had she got her point across? Years of watching Jock and Charlie
weren't helping enough. Too much of Mediator body language was
conscious; was arbitrary. She said, "When possibilities open, Crazy
Eddie doesn't see."

The Mediator thought that over. She said. "Make cocoa to look at first.
For safety."

     For poison, she meant.

     So Freddy made cocoa for the four of them-"Make it hot," Glenda
Ruth whispered-and an extra bulbful for analysis.

     "Too hot," Victoria said when she touched it. She gave it to the
Engineer, who carried it into the hidden part of Cerberus. The human
crew huddled with their heads together, sipping, their shoulders
shutting out the aliens around them. Freddy had a crime drama running on
a monitor; Victoria might have been watching it, and Merlin watched
intermittently, but no human was.

     "How are you doing?" Freddy asked.

     Glenda Ruth said, "I'm dancing as fast as I can, but the pace is
too damned slow. Jennifer, what were they eating?"

     Jennifer was running her hand along the pup's back as if it were a
cat; but her hand kept stopping to feel the weird geometry. She said,
"Just one dish. A gray crust around gray-green paste that looked a lot
like basic protocarb."

     "Jen, did it steam? Was it hot?"

     "It wasn't hot. What do you want to know?"

     She dared not tell them too much, but she had to know this. "Do
they cook?"

     "Glenda Ruth, the air coming through the new lock is warmer than it
is here, but there's no smell of cooking."

     "Okay." She looked at the faces around her. Open, honest faces
shadowed by every passing thought. Did they understand, would they
reveal, too much?

     Engineer and Warrior were certainly infected. The worm eggs might
well infect every Motie form in Cerberus's cabin. If that didn't reach a
Master, then an Engineer might have passed it on by now. But if a
Mediator wasn't infected soon . . . there wouldn't be anything to talk
about. Just a Master turned sterile male, and other forms showing the
same symptoms, and the blaine very clear.

 

 

2 Vermin City

 

 

And in that state of nature, no arts; no letters; no society; and which
is worst of all, continual fear and danger of violent death; and the
life of man, solitarv, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.

 

-Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan

 

 

From the beginning Freddy Townsend had been concerned about his
equipment. "I know we're prisoners," he told Victoria as soon as the
Mediator would understand. "I know you can take what you want."

     Leave your stuff alone if play to win," Victoria said. Need some
stuff for now."

     "Good. You think about future. You want us happy for future?"

     Say instead we want you not hating us for future."

     Good. Good. Then get them to leave my telescope the hell alone!
It's this whole complex, here and here, all this stuff-"

     Engineers make it better."

     'Don't want better. Want this stuff the way it is," Freddy said
distinctly. He had watched what happened to Hecate. He believed-and so
did Glenda Ruth-that the Moties would strip the telescope of anything
they wanted, leaving a tube and two lenses to be improved to their
hearts' content.

     They must have convinced Victoria; Victoria must have convinced one
of the Masters, Days later, the scope and its computerized
direction-finding and data-recording systems still matched Empire racing
specs.

 

 

     Freddy's fingers behind her ear teased Glenda Ruth awake.

     The smaller pup was clinging to his back, a tiny skewed head above
his left shoulder, wearing the generic smile; but Freddy looked quite
solemn. Glenda Ruth followed his pointing finger to a screen and . . .
what? Display of a broken kaleidoscope? Numbers indicated that she was
looking aft, under one-hundred-power magnification, via Freddy's telescope.

     We're decelerating. Whole fleet. To that," Freddy said.

     A shattered mirror on star-dusted black . . . mirrors, lots of
mirrors, circles and ribbons and scraps and one great triangle. The
mirrors weren't rotating, but some of what they illuminated was, on an
eccentric axis. Sunlight off the mirrors set it to glowing like the City
of God.

     "Schizophrenia City," Jennifer said.

     Glenda Ruth winced. "Pandemonium," she said. John Milton's capital
of Hell. If this was Captor Fleet's home base, they were indeed mad.

     Pandemonium was backlit, showing mostly black, but she could see
the lack of pattern. There were blocks and spires and tubes,
considerable fine structure, very spread out. As an artistic whole . . .
it wasn't whole.

     Jennifer said, "Cities do grow this way, if there's no street plan.
But in space? That's dangerous."

     "Dangerous," her pup said emphatically. Freddy's pup peeked out of
his arms and nodded wisely.

     Glenda Ruth called, 'Victoria?"

     "Something's happening," Terry Kakumi said.

     Light flashed here, there. A chunk of Pandemonium City broke free,
6 percent or 8 percent of the whole; rotated to use its section of
mirror as a shield, and pulled away. Ruby light sputtered at it, belatedly.

     "Civil war, maybe. Maybe a lifeboat running away from us. I don't
think they see Captor Fleet as friends."

     "Yeah, Terry. Maybe it's how Motie cities breed? But whose city?
Victoria?" No answer came. Glenda Ruth said, "Likely she's asleep."
Moties needed their sleep, or at least Mediators did.

     Terry said, "We've been decelerating for two hours now. Matching
velocities. Glenda Ruth, we have to see this-" Terry's arm flashed up to
block her eyes. A ruby glare filled the cabin. An instant later all
screens were black.

     "Langston Field," Terry said. "Ours. Don't think that place has
one. Sorry. Are you okay?"

     Freddy said, "Hell, we're under attack!"

     "But by what?" Jennifer asked.

     "Good question.'

     When nothing further happened, Terry presently cut bricks of basic
protocarb for their breakfast. They watched the screen, but it remained
dark.

     Victoria emerged from the airlock. The Mediator skimmed along one
of the big vines, picking red berries, then veered to join them. She
asked, "Do you take chocolate for breakfast?'

     Glenda Ruth spoke before Terry Kakumi could. "Sure. Freddy? Make it
lukewarm, then we can heat ours. Victoria, does your Engineer say it's
safe?"

     "Yes."

     Terry couldn't stand it. "We're pulling near a large structure. Is
it your home?"

     A moment's pause, then Victoria said, "No. Chocolate?"

     Freddy didn't move until Glenda Ruth opened the cocoa and pushed it
into his hands. No, he couldn't read minds, but she made eye contact and
thought hard: Yes, Freddy, Victoria's trying to distract us, yes, she's
hiding something, Freddy love, but we want the lizard-raping chocolate!

     Freddy set to work, meticulously measuring powder, shaking it with
boiled water, adding the basic protocarb product most crew called milk.
He poured it into squeezers and handed one, lukewarm, to the Mediator.
The others he set heating in the microwave.

     Victoria sipped without waiting. Her eyes widened. "Strange. Good."
She sipped again. "Good."

     "This is the least of what the Empire can offer. More to the point
is the meeting of unlike minds "And elbow space."

     Terry's patience was short. "The city?"

     "It's resources, Terry," Victoria said. We will take them."

     "Uh-huh. We want to observe the battle on-site," Terry Kakumi said.
"If-"

     "Not a battle, Terry. Pest control. No Master in there, no
Mediators, not even Engineers."

     "What are they, then? They're shooting at us.'

     "Watchmakers and . . . I don't know your word. Only animals.
Destructive small animals, dangerous when cornered. Use resources we need."

     "Vermin," Glenda Ruth said.

     "Thank you. Vermin. Yes, they're shooting, but we can protect
ourselves. What is it you want?"

     "I want to go in with you, with a camera." Terry took the bulb
Glenda Ruth handed him, but didn't drink. She sipped the chocolate: a
bit too hot, and that was good. Heat would kill what her fingertip had
added to the cocoa powder.

     "You would see our weapons in use. I know your nature, Terry
Kakumi. Warrior-Engineer, as close as your generalist species comes. But
able to talk well."

     Freddy suppressed a smile; but Terry showed his teeth. "You
wouldn't use your serious weapons for varmint control, Victoria.
Whatever it is that has you so embarrassed, it's something we have to
know. Later would be worse. Nasty surprises breed nasty surprises."

     The screen cleared. Pandemonium glowed before its mirrors.
Cerberus's Watchmakers had pushed a probe through the Field.

     Victoria sipped, and thought, and said, "I will ask Ozma."

 

     Merlin nested in the forepart of the cabin. He was young, with
clean white fur you ached to touch; he had never been female. He spent
much of his time watching the humans and-if Glenda Ruth was indeed
learning some basic captor language, if she'd correctly judged his body
language-discussing them with Victoria, the Doctor, the Engineers, the
Warriors. Masters asked questions and gave orders. They did not seem
inclined to needless conversation, even with other Masters. But they did
talk.

     Ozma, an older and clearly superior Master to Merlin (parent?),
lived somewhere out of sight beyond Cerberus's big new airlock. Thence
Victoria went. An hour later, the spidery Messenger scuttled through and
summoned Merlin from his place in the forecabin.

     Terry Kakumi slept curled in his couch like an egg in an egg cup.
Glenda Ruth watched for dreams to chase themselves across his round
features, but really, he was remarkably relaxed for a man who was about
to enter mystery.

     "He does that better than anyone I know," Freddy said. "If he knows
nothing is going to happen for twenty minutes, he's out like a light. I
guess that's what they mean by old campaigner."

     "You think it's a warrior's skill?"

     "It never would have occurred to me before. Sauron, heh?"

     The chaotic industrial complex was considerably closer now. Its
shape had changed, had closed around the gap left by the one departing
section, which was still in view a few kilometers away, under desultory
thrust. There was motion on the surface, a doubly silent rustling:
windows glinting (not many), small vehicles racing along wire tracks,
mirrors rippling as they swung to block a laser spear, a sudden spray of
- . . missiles? Tiny ships?

     Sporadic ruby beams bathed Cerberus with no effect. Just once the
entire mirror-sail complex focused white light with enough energy that
the cameras had to be pulled in. Several minutes later the screen was
glowing with just a touch of red heat. More minutes later the probe was
out again, and Pandemonium showed almost unchanged.

     "They ran out of power," Jennifer surmised. "What do you suppose is
in there? Watchmakers and what?'

     "Maybe nothing we know about," Glenda Ruth said. Watchmakers alone
might have built this. You saw Renner's recording:

they ran riot through MacArthur and finally turned it into something alien.'

     A tube poked from near the center of the structure, and extended,
longer and longer. Like a cannon. "Grab something," Jennifer said, and
reached to tighten Terry's straps. His eyes opened; with a shrug he
freed his arms and folded Jennifer into his chest.

     The screen went dark. In the airlock Merlin snapped some command;
every Motie form snatched for handholds. Cerberus torqued about them. In
the screen was a red glow...orange, yellow...holding.

     Victoria popped up beside Merlin, with several other Motie shapes
behind her. They all held close to their handholds. A Messenger was
towing one of their pressure suits.

     "Terry, you may travel with us, unarmed," Victoria said. "You'll
want hands for your camera anyway. We have restored it to the state you
are accustomed to. Don't try to leave your escorts."

     Terry took the camera from the Engineer. He made adjustments. One
of the screens lit with a close view of Victoria, blurred, then sharper.
Terry said, "How long?"

     "Suit up now"

     The Field was orange and cooling.

     Terry and Freddy examined the suit, whispering. Hecate's pressure
suits had been confiscated and stowed on the other side of the oval
airlock. They were hard suits, rigid pieces shaped to slide over one
another, with a fishbowl helmet. Now green-gray sludge in a flaccid
plastic bag rode the jet pack on the suit's back. The helmet's view had
been expanded; the sunblind visor was gone; the helmet itself was no
longer quite symmetrical.

     "You trust it?'

     "No choice, boss. I'm bored." Terry worked his way into the suit.
Before he'd finished, the Engineer and three Watchmakers were already at
work on him. Freddy and Jennifer smiled to watch. Glenda Ruth's stomach
was a hard knot.

     He could die

     Terry was zipped up when the alarms sounded again. He knew that
one: Anchor against attack!

     When the screen cleared, Pandemonium was very close. The pipe still
protruded near the center of the complex, but it pointed askew of
Cerberus. More conspicuously, the mirrors were gone...shredded, trailing
outward in comet's configuration.

     "It was a double attack on us," Terry said for his companions'
benefit. "The laser cannon isn't maneuverable, but you had to take out
the mirrors, too, right, Victoria?"

     She waved it off. "Battle is no skill of mine."

     Motion swarmed around the shreds of mirror. Glimmers and flashes:
they began to re-form. The laser cannon jerked into sudden motion, too
slow to catch Cerberus drifting around the city's edge. Others of Captor
Fleet were moving into position.

     "Come," Victoria said. She leapt for the airlock, and Terry, almost
as agile, followed.

 

 

 

     The Moties could hardly be unaware that they were showing him
Cerberus's Motie sections for the first time, and on record. Terry waved
his camera where he would. He was not trying for detail, but rather
looking for whatever would bear further investigation.

     He didn't get much of that. He was in a tube that curved like a
loop of intestine. Here a dark opening, here a bulge and an armed
Warrior clinging to handholds, here a lighted opening and a first
glimpse of an older Master. "Studying me. I'd better not stop," he said.
"Victoria isn't."

     The tube ended in a canister full of Warriors in armored pressure
suits.

     Victoria waved him in. The Warriors watched him, every one. "Forty
armed and armored Warriors, no two weapons alike, no two suits alike,
and . . . that one's pregnant, and that one." Distinct bulges in the
armor, where a human heart would be. Terry let the camera hold on four
others: "And I don't know what to make of those."

     There was a couch just for him. It had an orthopedic look and a
plenitude of straps. Terry gave the camera a good look before he
strapped in. "Looks like an Engineer and Doctor tried to design this for
a human spine. Let's see . . . Not bad. Not many humans build chairs
this good."

     The airlock was sealed and Victoria was gone.

     "Three windows, one fore and one aft . . - whichever - . . and this.

"Considerate bastards." The amidships window was right before his face.
One of the odd ones handed Terry a big folded umbrella, nearly
weightless. "They've taken me for a Pom."

     He was being judged. He chattered because of nerves.

     The tradition of Terry Kakumi's family was never to dwell on
tradition. Flexibility was a virtue. Landing on one's feet was a
graceful thing to do. In anarchy and in war and in the Empire's peace,
on Tanith and a score of other worlds, their numbers had grown. But he
and they knew their ancestry.

     The Kakumis were of Brenda Curtis's line.

     Brenda Curtis had lived nearly four hundred years ago. She'd had
six children of her own, and over two hundred had passed through her
orphanage farm on their path to adulthood. They tended to intermarry
because they understood each other.

     Brenda Curtis had been a Sauron superman.

     Current tales of the Sauron breeding centers were entirely
imaginary. Terry had no idea what his ancestor had escaped from. Only
the bald fact of her origin was known, and only to her children...and
their fathers? Who could tell, now?

     But twenty-four gene-tailored Motie Warriors were about to learn
whether a child of Brenda Curtis could take care of himself.

     He was not required to fight, Terry reminded himself. He would be
judged by whether he survived.

     The canister surged. Aft defined itself: the window was wreathed in
pale flame. Terry's chair rotated; the others didn't.

"They're pampering me, I think."

     His eye and camera found a broad patch of black against the stars,
and a scattering of blunt cylinders accelerating alongside his own. The
black edged across the stars. The troopship struck it with a surge and
an ominous crunch.

     The troopship turned powerfully. Thrust distorted Terry's voice.
"We've punched through the mirror. It's stronger than I expected. Maybe
they reinforced it after Cerberus's attack. I can see a ragged black
hole-ooppshit!" Pellets blasted through the cabin.

     Terry hadn't even had a chance to curl around himself. He took a
moment to understand that he was alive, unhurt. The rest- "Some Warriors
are hit, but they're ignoring it." He let the camera watch Warriors
place meteor patches in a tearing hurry. "The ship's decelerating hard.
The hailstorm isn't over. Maybe you can hear the impacts, but the
pellets aren't hitting the life support system anymore. We're thrusting,
too. Something-" Terry grabbed handholds.

     The ship smacked nozzles-first into a wall, with a booming recoil.

     Terry's vision cleared quickly. One of the odd ones had already cut
the ship's hull wide open, and the Warriors were pouring through. Terry
searched for a strap release.

     The four odd ones moved last.

     Terry cut himself free and followed them out. "I'd bet anything
that one's a Warrior-Doctor," he told his audience. "Those two are
officers: better armor, and the widgetry they're carrying looks like
communications, not weapons." The officers separated quickly. The last
Motie was more compact, larger head, the hands more delicate. "That one
looks like a cross between Warrior and Engineer. I'll follow it."

     The starscape was gaudy, but the mirrors were brighter yet. Terry
opened his silver umbrella . . . his laser shield.

     Pandemonium was brilliantly backlit by the mirrors. The troops were
jetting into a madman's maze. One and another Warrior flashed red, then
puffed neon-red gas. Answering fire made actinic flares among the spires
and blocks. Warrior troops swarmed from other directions. The ships of
Captor Fleet were on all sides of Pandemonium.

     Once Terry looked back. He reported, "The troopship's wrecked and
nobody cares. They must be counting on their Warrior-Engineer to build
them a way home. They'll guard him pretty carefully." But Terry was no
longer sure of that. Pandemonium was very close.

     They were approaching a windowless wall. The lasers that menaced
them were suddenly unable to reach them, except for stragglers . . .
such as Terry Kakumi, crouched behind his umbrella. A red dot played
across it, and then he, too, was out of the lasers' view. He moved his
umbrella-mirror and saw a bulging crater in the wall, and Captor troops
diving through.

     Too fast. He activated his backpack jets, then swore luridly for
his audience and posterity. "Sorry. I'm getting low thrust. Watchmakers
must have fixed my bloody jet pack." The crater came up, too fast, and
he steered to miss the edge. "Must think I don't mass that much after
all." He clutched his camera to his chest, pointing down into the dark.

 

 

     A racer's crew must see what's going on. A warship is a different
matter, and most of Hecate's window space had disappeared . .. but not all.

     So Cerberus's human crew had three views of the battle. There was
Freddy's telescope, and the window, and Terry's camera. Mostly they
watched the feed from Terry's camera.

     Thirty-four black-armored Warriors had plunged through a black
wall, and the camera POV plunged after. Mirrorlight glowed through from
behind, illuminating a honeycomb structure too small for humans or
normal Moties. Ruby and green flared within the structure. An explosion
ripped open a score of rooms. Then tiny forms in silver armor were
jetting among the larger Warrior shapes, riding bullet-shaped rockets no
larger than themselves, swerving at terrific accelerations, or just
blasting through walls and Warriors and into space carrying dead passengers.

     Terry's voice said, "Watchmakers, I think."

     Jennifer said, "Right. It's like films from MacArthur."

     Terry's voice ran on. "They're using projectile weapons, and so are
the Warriors: spray guns with tiny bullets."

     Jennifer clutched Freddy's arm and pointed through a window. Glenda
Ruth didn't turn around. In a moment Freddy touched her shoulder and
said, "Somebody's arrived, some other ship. Real Moties, not-vermin. We
can see the ripples in the skin of Cerberus. Maybe your brother's
arranged something."

     "Great," Jennifer said. She started to say something to Glenda

     Ruth and fell silent.

     "Glenda Ruth?" Freddy said. "Are you-"

     "Not okay, Freddy. Not. He's so scared!"

     "Traces of the original structure here, I think. Nickel-iron being
shaped on site. This may have been an icy asteroid rather than a comet,
closer to the sun before all these mirrors altered its orbit-"

     "I never saw you like this. How do-"

     "Can't you hear the fear in his voice? He could be killed, That's
why Mediators can't stand battle. They're all trying to chew each other
up, the Warriors and those little Hell beasts and whatever's out of
sight and-oh God!" The view jerked and skewed, and Terry's voice
stopped. Her hands clamped hard on Freddy's arm.

     Freddy didn't speak. Glenda Ruth saw that her nails had drawn
blood. Her voice rose into a hysterical whine. "They shot him!"

 

 

     This looked solid, some kind of support strut. Terry had dodged
behind it when the bullets sprayed across him. He huddled behind it,
reaching. Engineers and Watchmakers had been at work on his suit, and he
could only hope-there, the pouch of meteor patches.

     He pulled one open. His fingertip traced three tiny holes across
his chest carapace, between his right nipple and right shoulder. They'd
nearly closed themselves; the hiss had dwindled. The patch covered all
three.

     But the hiss continued, and he wondered how he would reach his
back. The pain and wet were just over his shoulder blade.

     The Warriors had gone on. A big Motie head poked around a partition
(big was friendly) looked him over (officer?) and withdrew. Another such
shape floated nearby, leaking fog through scores of tiny holes, its
laser weapon spinning nearby. Maybe the little demons had gone after it
deliberately. It was the Warrior-Engineer.

     "Doctors probably aren't intelligent." Terry had forgotten his
audience; he was talking to himself. "Probably. One to treat any Class,
but none to treat a human. Who's going to treat me? Three bullets
through my right lung."

     With his fingers on the edge of the second patch, he reached behind
him, forced it past the pain, then rubbed his back across the support
strut. The hiss stopped.

     A cough would have worried him. He'd be coughing blood before this
was over. Meanwhile, for his audience: "These were high velocity slugs
intended to penetrate armor. Fast but small. No tumble. No stopping
power. They're for Watchmakers or something not much bigger. Infections
aren't any danger out here. Ronald Reagan was shot through the lung with
a bigger bullet than these, seventy years old in FDA-era medicine, and
he went on to finish two terms as president of the United States of
America." And Reagan hadn't had Brenda Curtis for an ancestor.

     "I'm going for the gun," Terry said, and leapt. Turning, he
snatched the Warrior-Engineer's laser rifle and impacted his feet
against a wall, the camera and gun turned down. The wall shuddered, and
his camera caught six silver shapes plunging through.

     His gun caught them, too, in a spray of projectiles. There was no
answering fire, only a twinkling of edged weapons. His tiny bullets were
cutting them up good, but six had become twenty jumping in pursuit as
Terry Kakumi's recoil and suit jets hurled him up through the crater
hole. And now they were all bright in mirror light and starlight, and
Terry held his camera on the swarm.

     A fireball blasted out of Pandemonium, half behind an angular
bulge. Terry didn't bother with it. The camera recorded the shock wave
surging through the city.

     His breathing was going ragged; he'd have to stop talking soon.
But: "They don't fit the suits. There are slack parts. Six-limbed suits,
Watchmaker suits, with one limb tied down, and-" He coughed and stopped
trying. Let the camera speak for him.

     They wore borrowed pressure suits with the lower left arm tied
down. Half of them had used up their jets and jumped anyway. Animals.
Others were fleeing the light; but three turned and made for Terry. He
held the camera on them and slashed them with high-V pellets.

     Nice. Two merely died, but one silver suit, filleted, puffed its
occupant thrashing into space. They weren't Watchmakers at all.

They were something nastier.

 

 

     "I never saw   Freddy peered at the display. "Victoria? What in
Hell-" Victoria was missing. "Glenda Ruth? I've seen 'em before."

     She didn't want to look. She made herself look and considered what
she was seeing. She said, "The Zoo on Mote Prime," and watched them
remembering.

     Fourth floor: a Motie city, struck by disaster. Cars overturned and
rusted in littered, broken streets. Aircraft had embedded their wreckage
in the ruins of fire-scorched buildings. Weeds grew from cracks in the
pavement. In the center of the picture was a sloping mound of rubble,
and a hundred small black shapes darted and swarmed over it.

     Every student at the Institute had studied that scene. The Motie
cycle of boom and bust was so dependable that plants and animals had
evolved specifically for ruined cities!

     One had a pointed, ratlike face with wicked teeth. But it was not a
rat. It had one membranous ear, and five limbs. The foremost limb on the
right side was not a fifth paw; it was a long and agile arm, tipped with
claws like hooked daggers.

     "But those were quite different," Jennifer said. 'Look, these are
all hands, and longer, leaner. Freddy, can you summon up a copy of What
I Did on My Summer Vacation? I think the skulls are bigger, too!"

     "They're changed," Glenda Ruth said. "Evolution must have moved
much laster for them. Shorter generations, bigger litters. Why not?
Freddy, I've got to get Victoria."

     Terry Kakumi's voice was much weakened. "I don't know how to tell
Warriors that I need medical help. Freddy, if you're still hearing me,
s-s-s--" Coughing.

     Freddy nodded. He floated toward the airlock, slowly, hands visible
for the Warrior on duty. When Freddy reached the lock, the Warrior put
his gunpoint in Freddy's ribs.

     Freddy put his head in the lock and yelled, "Victoria! Now! Terry's
been shot! Do you hear me?"

     A lopsided face wreathed in white fur confronted him. Freddy
wondered if he was seeing Ozma. The Master spoke a word to the Warrior,
who pointed its gun elsewhere. The Master turned full away and
hiss-whistled.

     Victoria came. Freddy explained rapidly; Victoria translated;
theMaster went away; so did Victoria. The Warrior reached, turned Freddy
around, and pushed him back to the control center.

     On-screen, a pair of Warriors had retrieved Terry. Freddy could
glimpse them at the screen's edge, towing him. Voiceless, Terry pointed
the camera to pick up: A snowstorm of dead war rats, big as greyhounds
and small as puppies, all armed with edged weapons, some armed with guns.

     A factory, empty, scaled down. That looked to be a distillery;
that, a smelter. Even in the asteroid mines of most systems, humans
would align their furniture. Here boilerplate-bulky machines pointed off
at all angles, leaving almost no waste space.

A sudden firefight receded as Terry's escorts made for safety. A
Warrior's grenade opened a wall to space. War rats blew past them toward
the stars. Warriors picked off the few in stolen suits.

     Victoria was back. "Ozma has told the Chief, but-" She saw the
screen. "That's better. Your friend was inside too many walls. Ozma has
also summoned a hybrid who might help your friend, an interbreeding of
Doctor and Master. We only have one."

Freddy nodded and said appropriate things. Glenda Ruth onlywatched. The
camera didn't seem to be pointing at anything interesting anymore.

 

 

3 Chocolate

 

 

And there're a

hun-dred-mil-lion-oth-ers, like

all of you successfully if

delicately gelded (or spaded)

gentlemen (and ladies)

 

     -e. e. cummings

 

 

     When the Doctor-Master arrived, Freddy had anticipated him. He had
library medical tapes already running. The long-fingered almost-Master
watched for a few minutes, looked the three humans over, decided Freddy
was the male, peeled him, and began comparing him to what he was seeing
on the screen. The Anglic commentary ran at low volume while Victoria
spoke a running translation into the fleshy trumpet of the Doctor's ear.
She was frequently baffled.

     The Doctor was a young male, Victoria told them. "Doctor
Doolittle," Glenda Ruth named him, and saw Jennifer smile. Freddy's face
remained a rictus of discomfort.

     Glenda Ruth wondered why Captor Fleet had chosen to feed such a
peculiarity when they were so obviously short of resources. As if they
had known aliens were coming . . . known ten years ago. Where the hell
was Terry?

     Terry was alive, technically, when they brought him in nearly two
hours later. A misshapen Warrior was pumping his rib cage, breathing for
him, Glenda Ruth looked at him and gave up hope.

     Doctor Doolittle spoke rapidly.

     The Warrior slashed the front of Terry's suit and pulled him out. A
pair of Watchmakers pulled a black pressure balloon open and fished out
transparent tubes and a canister. The little Doctor-Master wrapped
itself around Terry's head and shoulders, planted his ear on Terry's
torso, and listened. Then it pulled his head far back and fed the tube
into his nose.

     Terry thrashed weakly. Red flowed down the tube. The Motie watched
for a few minutes, then spoke. The Warrior had gone back to breathing
for Terry, flexing his chest, on and on, without fatigue. The
Watchmakers fished out a squeezebulb of clear fluid.

     Glenda Ruth stopped watching. She couldn't stand it.

     Freddy pulled his shorts on and left it at that; the Motie Doctor
might need to compare again. He caught her eye as she turned away, and
she knew another moment of dread.

     "Glenda Ruth-"

     She turned away as the strange doctor spoke softly to the Warriors.

 

     Captor Fleet was at work beyond Cerberus's windows. From all they
could see, the War Rats and Watchmakers were no longer to be feared.
Larger ships had moved in. Altered troopships and tinier ships yet moved
in a cloud around Pandemonium. An Engineer with a crew of Watchmakers
worked on one of the damaged troopships. Large Moties from time to time
came out of the ruins with-things. Broken machinery. Tankage. Plastic bags.

     Jennifer said, "Remember the battle? Just before we were captured?
Just lasers, no projectiles. In Pandemonium the Warriors used bullets,
but only inside walls. But the rats and brownies were shooting everywhere."

     Your point?"

     "Well, Victoria keeps calling them animals. She especially likes
the word vermin. Maybe because they don't care how much stuff they throw
away, even if it can be recycled. That's what all those little ships are
doing, chasing down stuff that got loose during the fight."

     Glenda Ruth nodded. "Yeah. How's Terry?"

     "Breathing on his own. I want a human doctor."

     "Hang in there. Terry's tough."

     Silence.

     "I couldn't watch."

     "I noticed," Jennifer said.

     "You think he's not feeling anything, and you're almost right, he
won't remember how bad it is. But his body, his nerves, he's hurt,
Jennifer, and I can feel it. Oh, hell, don't you leave me, too!"

     "Too?"

     "Freddy saw me! He saw me turning away from Terry. Squeamish. I'm
going to lose him, Jennifer!"

     "Not if he watches you save our asses. But you're juggling
priceless eggs in variable gravity, girl."

     Glenda Ruth only nodded. She couldn't answer that at least they
were right on schedule.

 

 

     "I hope you're not overly tired, sir," Chris Blaine said.

     "Not yet, not in this gravity," Bury said. He looked across the
room to Omar, who once again held Ali Baba. "Against all reason I find
myself attracted to the pu-to Ali Baba. An unexpected pleasure. But I
fear we are away from the comforts of Sinbad to no great purpose.
Except, of course, to reassure our hosts." It was an awkward situation,
made more so because no one wanted to talk about it. It was the one
thing East India and Medina Traders agreed to completely: neither would
allow the other to talk to Horace Bury alone. "They cling to me as to a
talisman," Bury said.

     "Or a credit card," Blaine said, and Bury glared.

     The outer door opened and a thin, spidery shape entered. The Motie
went to Omar and waited patiently as Omar and Eudoxus gathered around
it, then chattered excitedly.

     "Something important," Blaine said. He thumbed the microphone of
his communicator. "Captain, an East India messenger just came in.
Whatever it's saying has got both the Mediators listening hard."

     "Could it be about Hecate?" Renner's voice asked.

     "I don't-"

     "Stand by one," Renner said.

     "What?" Joyce demanded. "What's happening?" She edged closer to the
Moties, pickup camera whirring softly.

     "Rawlins has spotted a fleet," Renner said. "A big one, coming from
in-system. Hyperbolic orbit, accelerating like they've got lots of power."

     "Warships," Blaine said.

     "Sure sounds like it," Renner said. "Don't know whose, but they're
heading this way."

     'Excellency, we have news," Omar said.

     "Thank you."

     "Excellency, the humans are all safe. One, the ship's engineer, was
injured in a way that I do not quite understand, but I am assured it was
through no fault of the Crimean Tartars, who have been persuaded of the
value of their guests. One of my apprentices, very young and
inexperienced but fluent in Anglic, has been accepted by the Tartars and
will presently be allowed to speak with the humans." Omar beamed. He
will, of course, be pleased to invite a representative of our Medina
Allies, as soon as one arrives."

     "This is splendid news," Bury said. "We are in your debt. I wonder
if we might prevail upon Medina's hospitality for one more favor."

     "You have but to ask, presuming it is possible," Eudoxus said.

     "A message," Bury said. "It would be well for all concerned if Lord
Blaine were informed that his offspring are safe."

     Eudoxus and Omar looked at each other. Ali Baba's attention
remained fixed on Bury. "An interesting notion," Eudoxus said. "But one
that presents considerable technical difficulties. Neither East India
nor Medina controls Crazy Eddie's Sister. Nor do the Crimean Tartars.
The Khanate now holds that point and even now gathers more warships to
consolidate their hold. Their own, and others. We fear they have created
a formidable alliance, one which may even now be growing."

     "A combined action of Medina and East India might suffice to escort
one ship to the Sister," Omar said. "But as East India has more ships in
that area, our losses would be the greater. We would require compensation."

     "I had in mind something simpler," Bury said. "Send a message
through the Crazy Eddie point to Murcheson's Eye. Take one of your
flimsy token ships. Wrap a transmitter in a thick layer of suitably
ablative material with a mechanical device to turn it on once through.
Let it broadcast its location. Message cubes inside should survive long
enough to be retrieved."

     "Simple mechanical device," Omar said.

     Jump shock is an experience previously described to us, which

I have now twice experienced," Eudoxus said. "It is-formidable.
Excellency, I need hardly point out that the contents of a message to
your blockade battle fleet will be of great interest to all of us. Will
you summon that fleet here?"

     "I think not," Bury said. "But surely it would be to our advantage
to have those not inconsiderable resources at our disposal?" He looked
significantly at the Motie Warriors. "And of course we will continue to
enjoy your gracious hospitality as we negotiate."

     Eudoxus and Omar exchanged looks, then Eudoxus began to speak,
slowly and carefully, in the glottal language the Moties had been using
to speak to their Masters. Both Masters replied, each to a Mediator,
never to each other. The messenger was sent out. Two came back; they
delivered messages to each of the Mediators. The Masters spoke quickly
and curtly, the Mediators at greater length. The discussion continued
for a long time as joyce's pickup whirred

     Bury waited with a look of serene calm. Ali Baba aped his look,

a study of serious concentration. Blaine reported developments to Sinbad
and Renner.

     Finally Eudoxus spoke. "It seems you are correct, Excellency. We
may have need of your fleet. We count five fleets probably converging on
us. One is from Byzantium. We have reports that the Masters of the Mote
Beta moons, the group we have called the Persian Empire, are gathering a
fleet. The Khanate has summoned allies to their aid in holding the
Sister. There comes another large group from sunward."

     "In other words, everyone who has warships is becoming involved,"
Joyce Trujillo said.

     "Just so," Omar said. "And thus our Masters are agreed. The
partnership between Medina and East India shall be renewed. When that is
accomplished, it would be well to summon whatever resources your Empire
can bring."

     "Before they kill us all," Joyce said.

     Omar bowed. "Just so."

 

 

 

     Engineers had erected a screen around the area where Dr. Doolittle
and his aides worked on Terry. Freddy was back there for ten hours,
while Jennifer and Glenda Ruth waited alone. Finally he came out.

     "I'll have to go back presently," he said. "They want my opinions.
Mostly I don't know, but I can work the data retrieval system for Dr.
Doolittle. It's mostly in charts. Some of it I have to read to him, with
gestures. He learns fast, numbers he understands already. Got any coffee?"

     Jennifer handed him a bulb. "I should heat that."

     "Heat the next one. I'll drink this."

     All right." Jennifer put a bulb in the microwave and started it.

     "Freddy, I haven't heard Victoria back there?"

     "She's been gone for hours. One of the others, I think the Engineer
that's been . . . improving Hecate, came and got her, and that was the
last I saw of her. Sometimes I talk into a mike and Dr. Doolittle
listens to what has to be a translation, but I don't know who's on the
other end." Freddy sipped the lukewarm coffee. "Good stuff. Thanks."

     "When can I see him?" Jennifer's cry was more nearly a wail.

     Freddy looked to Glenda Ruth.

     Glenda Ruth dropped her pensive look and shuddered. "I think you
should wait to be asked. Something odd is happening."

     "I'm scared," Jennifer said. "We talked about-he grew up on

     Tanith, you know. Freddy, he will be all right!"

     "If the Moties can manage it, he will be," Freddy said. "They're
going all out. They have some instrument the size of a spatball racket
that puts a three-D image of Terry's insides on our tri-vee screen.
They've got him stabilized. Blood pressure has been the same for hours now'

 

 

 

     It had not been instantly obvious: the looming bulk of the Mosque
had been a block of water ice permeated by tunnels when Sinbad docked.
But Engineers had been at work, carving rooms out of the ice,
insulating, decorating. The lounge, located just outside Sinbad's
airlock, had been growing during the negotiations. Now there was a small
kitchen, a wardrobe, and a half-completed minigym besides the
conversation pit with Motie and human chairs and couches. Chris feared
it would be the size of Serpens City before they accomplished anything.

     Eudoxus spoke long and earnestly to the Master called Admiral
Mustapha Pasha. From time to time Omar spoke to the East India Master in
the guttural language Chris Blaine had learned to recognize as the Motie
trade koine. Ali Baba moved from Bury to Omar and back, but his
attention was always on Bury.

     Messengers went to and fro like big-headed, lopsided spider
monkeys, beautiful only in their agility. Mediators and Masters took
frequent rest periods and returned always together, sometimes with Motie
pups. The Mediators were talking now, briskly, as if it hadn't all been
talked to death long since.

     Chris watched and listened and presently offered to speak for
Joyce's pickup camera. Joyce tried to find an excuse to refuse and gave
up almost instantly. "Thank you, Lieutenant Blaine," she said most
courteously, and posed him in a corner of the new lounge.

     So: scholar's pose, no sexual signals, and give her his best. "A
pidgin is needed to bridge two languages because shadings and nuances
and background assumptions don't work. You need it whenever nuances
don't work. But Motie language is inflections and body language and even
scent, and any of that might have to be dropped for a telephone, or
pressure suits, or video with a bad connection. The weird thing is just
how easily these Moties use what they can and drop everything else. It
isn't just the flexibility of the trade language. They generally have to
create a trade language on the spot." Chris saw goblin ears focused on
him and wondered how much they would understand. How much he understood.

     "We're watching a parallel here. Ali Baba, not yet at the age of
reason, clearly understands the concept called Fyunch(click) in the Mote
Prime language. We're watching him learn both Anglic and the new pidgin
simultaneously, and in hours he has learned what a bright human child
might pick up in days or weeks. Biological specialization at work. And
of course we've seen that in the other specialties.

     "We're learning a lot about Moties, and that's important."

     "Can you say more about that, Lieutenant?" Joyce asked. Her tone
was richly professional.

     "We've no choice, this time," Chris said. "Blockades just aren't
going to work. We'll have to learn to get along with the Moties-"

     "One way or another," Joyce said, but her own pickup mike wasn't
on. "Lieutenant-" She stopped.

     Here came the paired messengers again. Chris watched them scamper
along the chamber's multicolored rock, breaking stride and zigging into
channels and depressions. He'd watched them several times, and this time
he was sure: their fur changed color to match the rock. Piloerection was
doing that, exposing different layers, but the effect hid them like
chameleons. They reached their respective Masters, clung to their fur,
and whispered briefly.

     The Masters had one final exchange with their Mediators, and all
four Mediators came to the human group.

     "Excellency," Omar said. "I am pleased to inform you that Medina
and East India are agreed, in principle and in all essential details."
He bowed; his feet left the rock and returned when he straightened.

     "This is pleasing," Bury said.

     Eudoxus bowed, too. Nobody laughed. "We have agreed on our status
and domains, but more important is that we have agreed about you. We
tell you nothing new when we say our choices are limited, and our
greatest asset is your friendship."

     Bury nodded. "More pleasing still. We are honored to be your friends."

     "Thank you," Omar said. "We perceive that even if we watch you
compose the message you will send to your colleagues in the Crazy Eddie
Squadron, we must still trust you to tell us its meaning. Before you
send this message you will naturally wish to speak with crew aboard your
ship, and it is pointless to detain you here. When your message is
complete, East India will deliver it. A suitable ship is being readied."

     This time Bury's smile was warm and genuine. "Our thanks. Your
hospitality has been admirable, but perhaps my friends would be more
comfortable aboard our own ship."

     "There is one matter," Omar said. "My colleague at the Crimean
Tartar fleet reports his own observation that all the humans aboard
Hecate are alive, and only the engineer-warrior has been injured; but
for reasons that the Crimean Tartar Mediator will neither explain nor
discuss, he has not been permitted to speak with them. We have been
promised that this will change soon.

     Bury acknowledged with a nod.

     Damned odd, Chris thought. Something has changed, something
happened that the Tartars don't want us to know. What? But Eudoxus and
Omar knew that as well as he did.

     "Do you wish to return to your ship now?" Eudoxus asked.

     Bury nodded gravely. "It would be convenient."

     "Medina and East India have come to another agreement, Excellency,"
Omar said. "But one which requires your consent. With your permission,
Au Baba will become your companion. An apprentice. Of course he will
spend only part of his time with you, as he must learn our languages and
customs as well."

     Bury bowed slightly. "I am flattered. I find him an agreeable
companion. However, you will understand, there will be times when I must
be alone with my friends."

     "Of course, Excellency."

     "Meanwhile, this is satisfactory. We go now to draft our messages.
We will, of course, read and explain to you any message we compose."

     "Thank you. We will provide you with an escort," Eudoxus said.
"Joyce, your viewers may be interested in this base. If you would care
to see more of it, I am available to conduct you on a tour. We'll have
you back on Sinbad in, say, two hours?"

     "Perhaps another time," Chris Blaine said. What did they have in
mind? Nuances here, subtle, ominous.

     Eudoxus spread her hands slightly. "There may be no other time when
we are both free, but of course it will be as you wish."

     "No, I want to go," Joyce said. "You can tell me about the message
later when we finish the interview. Eudoxus, I'd love to see the rest of
your base."

     "Very good. Join us when you can, Joyce," Bury said affably.

     Chris as a Navy officer knew that he didn't have Bury's authority.
If Bury saw no way to stop her or them, how could Chris? He'd have to
use persuasion- Outmaneuvered. Joyce was gone, Eudoxus leading and a
Warrior behind. Bury and Omar followed at a leisurely pace, chatting,
Bury carrying Ali Baba. They left Chris and Cynthia to bring up the rear.

 

 

     After fifteen hours in the hidden depths of Cerberus, Victoria
arrowed through the airlock with the agility of a Messenger. Glenda Ruth
was jolted.

     "Victoria? Victoria, what are th-"

     "We have to talk. Ambassadors are arriving."

     "Ambassadors from where?"

     "Second, from the kingdom that allies with your ships called Sinbad
and Atropos, henceforth Medina Trading Company."

     Jennifer smiled acknowledgment. "Medina-"

     "Later," Victoria said. "The Medina ship will rendezvous here;
Vermin City makes a convenient target. But the first is already aboard.
He speaks for former allies of Medina, henceforth East India Trading
Company. The two are now involved in a dominance dance. We must settle
certain matters before he may see you. We've been verbal-dancing for
some days."

     Glenda Ruth looked at the screen that hid Terry and Doctor
Doolittle. "Can we summon a human doctor?"

     "He is in no more danger than you are," Victoria said. "How is it
that one of our Engineers has turned male without first giving birth?"

     "Oops," Jennifer said.

     "And so has one of our Warriors," Victoria said, "and although
Watchmakers are difficult to keep track of-"

     "How do you feel?"

     "We must settle this now. Have you brought alien death among us?
What did you say, Glenda Ruth?"

     "How do you feel, Victoria?"

     The Mediator tasted the question, as if she found the flavor novel
and fascinating. "I feel good. Motivated. The air is sweet, our food
seems up to specs, my appetite-" Victoria suddenly reached between her
legs. "Talk fast," she said. "For your lives."

"I have a recording to play for you."

 

     BLAINE INSTITUTE REPORTS, Volume 26, Number 5, Imperial Library
number ACX-7743DL-2359 10:26:5

     Approaches to Stability of the Mote Civilization

Ishikara, Mary Anne, Dashievko, Ahmed, Grodnik, Vladimir Lambert, George
G.: Rikorsky, W. L., and Talbot, Fletcher E,

     

"The C-L Symbiote,"

     Research reported in this document was funded by grants from the
Imperial Ministry ot Defense, the Imperial Select Commission for
Governing Relations with Aliens, and the Blaine Foundation.

 

Summary

 

 

     The Blaine Symbiote or C-L (Contraceptive-Longevity) worm is
bioengineered from a Motie benign parasitic organism similar to
platyhelminths. The resulting C-L organism is a symbiote that lives in
the Motie body and produces the same hormone that the male testes produce.

     The original symbiotes were universally present in the intestinal
tracts of all Moties studied. The first forms were detected in the Motie
Engineer taken aboard MacArthur, but none of those specimens survived.
The current C-L syrnbmote has been bred from a strain taken from the
Motie known as Ivan. It is known to survive in Mediator castes, and
there is no reason to suppose it will not thrive in all Motie castes,

     In all Motie castes so far examined there has been one testis, and
the documents brought by the Motie ambassadors, and the Moties
themselves, do not contradict this, This testis normally withers,
Hapgood et. al (I) have speculated that this withering is triggered in
part by pheromones given of f by a pregnant female, but it is known
Ivanov and Spector. (2)) that the process is more complex than that.

     Upon withering of the single testis, the Motie turns female,
Pregnancy must follow soon after or the Motie sickens and dies, with
symptoms not unlike vitamin deficiency. See Renner, K. (3), Fowler, S.
(4), and Elaine and Blaine (5), as well as The Report of the MacArthur
Expedition (6), for details. The process of giving birth excites cells
in the birth canal, and more male testes form,

     The C-L symbiote normally sites itself anywhere in the body cavity
and does not wither. Present data indicate that several C-Ls have no
more effect than one, It is believed that this is due to excretion of
surplus hormone via Plumbing-Six, tentatively the kidney.

     We have observed no signs that C-L will breed in a host Motie,
undoubtedly due to inhibition by the hormone itself. Consequently C-L
must be bred externally in an environment that provides sufficient fluid
around them to flush the hormone.

 

     Video Report (Reuters)

 

     Blaine Institute Announces New Developments in Bioengineering

     (Film clip: Lord and Lady Elaine, the Hon. Glenda Ruth Blaine,
students at the Blaine Institute, and His Excellency the Ambassador from
Mote Prime, announcing publication of results of bioengineering
development.)

 

 

     "Of course that record could have been made at any time," Victoria
said.

     "It has me in it."

     "Or a very good double, Glenda Ruth. It would take much forethought
to plan far in advance to deceive us into believing that a Mediator can
survive this long-but your Empire has both means and motive."

     "I'm in the pictures, too," Jennifer said.

     "Yes. You would require two doubles and two surgical alterations of
adults. Is this beyond your capability?"

     Freddy's eyes wandered from the screen to Glenda Ruth to the
screen, and he shook his head.

     Victoria, watching him carefully, said, "Jock's survival surprised
you, Freddy, when you learned of it from Jennifer and Glenda Ruth. With
her training, could Glenda Ruth deceive you? And Jennifer?"

     "It's not that. Think, Victoria. If that's not Jennifer and Glenda
Ruth, then it's two actors just out of surgery who have to fool Motie
Mediators, and know they've done it!"

     Good, Freddy! "This game gives us no profit," Glenda Ruth said.

     "Victoria, you already feel better than you have in years! And your
Engineer, and your Warrior, are they sick?"

"Is this reversible in fertile castes?" Victoria demanded.

     "Probably. With difficulty, but very probably. Is the native
parasite endemic to space civilizations?"

     "If so, I do not know of it. It is no skill of mine. Would I be
infected with a parasite and not know?"

"Why not? People often are," Freddy said.

     "Even those who live in isolation? I see you believe so." The Motie
paused, and whatever expressions Glenda Ruth had been able to read were
replaced by a different mask. "I must think on this."

"Wait. There." She could have remained silent- Too late. Victoria
turned. "What?"

     "I don't have any better argument than that." Glenda Ruth pointed.
"On the screen, Victoria."

The busy spacecraft of Captor Fleet had torn away a tremendous strip of
the city's skin. Pandemonium lay exposed, a hive of cells still sparking
with defenses. Corpses floated away in a pestilential cloud of black
dots. The ships pulled a square kilometer of transparent skin over the
wound and moved inside to work. Nothing was to be lost.

     "That's your past, a million years or more of your past. Breeding
yourselves into a starving cannibal horde, then tearing your numbers
down in blood. Vermin City. That's your future, forever, without us."
Glenda Ruth waved at the screens. "It's Vermin City or the Crazy Eddie
Worm."

 

 

4 Messages

 

 

Three may keep a secret, if two of them are dead.

 

-Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard's Almanac

 

 

Chris, it's time," Kevin Renner said. "Tell me about you and Joyce."

     Blaine looked from Renner to Horace Bury. No help there. Sinbad's
lounge had grown larger yet; it seemed very large, and very empty.

     "All right, Captain, we were sleeping together, so to speak, and
then we weren't. I'm more worried about what the Moties might get out of
her."

     "So am I. Try again."

     Chris Blaine saw no point in pretending to misunderstand. "I got to
know her. I could see what she was looking for in me, in a man, and when
I got some free time, I, hell. I let her see it. But when we reached
MGC-R-31 and Motie ships came spitting out...How to put this?"

     "She wanted you to keep your promises."

     Chris gaped. "Well, but I never-"

     The Captain said, "What she wants from a man is knowledge and
power. That was what you let her see. But when Moties appeared, she
wanted in on the action. You couldn't give her that. You couldn't even
let her keep interrupting you while you were on duty. What else couldn't
you give her?"

     "Aw, hell. Captain, she wanted to know what my sister's bringing. I
don't know! Not certainly, I only know what Dad and Mom, what the
Institute, wanted."

     "Which is enough," Renner said.

     "Well, no . . . well. That was the trouble. I couldn't tell her as
much as I do know because the Mediators would read her. They'd be doing
that now if she knew anything. Now she won't talk to me at all."

     "Chris, you did make promises. You used body language and nuances
and all the things Jock and Charlie taught you. You've got to be more
careful of how you use people."

     Chris's ears burned.

     "If you told her anything, if she learned anything that the Moties
shouldn't know, tell me now."

     "Captain, she heard you talking about Crazy Eddie's worm. She was
sure I must know all about it. There was nothing I could do to tell her
different."

     "She's a reporter. She must have met every brand of liar there is."

"Yeah. I thought it must be Mom's C-L worm. I didn't tell her that. Now
she thinks I'm dirt. Yes, she's right, I lied to her. I had to."

     Captain Renner studied him and presently sighed. "All right,
Lieutenant. Now what the hell else is going on? What's your reading of
this situation with the Crimean Tartars?"

     "I think Omar is as confused as we are," Blaine said. "Glenda Ruth
must have done something to shake them up."

     'We may well be able to guess what it is," Bury said. "Which could
leave her in some danger."

     "Whether or not the worm works as advertised," Chris said. "Yeah,
I'd thought of that," Renner said. "But so far-" "So far no harm has
come to them," Bury said. "And time is very much on our side. The
Empire, for all its divisions, remains a nearly unified force. We have
no need to negotiate alliances to gain great strength. With the Moties
it is not so."

     "Horace, what will happen to the Moties?" Renner demanded. "What
should happen to them?"

     "I truly do not know."

     "You'll pardon me, but you don't seem quite the fanatic you used to
be."

     "Kevin, how could I be? I see here a tragedy, a people not unlike
my own, with few resources, divided against themselves."

     "Finding the whole place shot through with Bury Mediators might
have changed your perspective?"

     "Don't miss the implication," Chris said. "They can swallow His
Excellency's views and not choke. That tells us a lot about them."

     "Yeah, but does it tell us enough? Horace, I can't believe you've
changed that much."

     "I bow to Allah's will. Kevin, the Empire barely had the resources
to guard one gate, and that one through a sun. Shall it now have two
blockade fleets, one to hold a volume of normal space? Perhaps, but at
great cost, and for how long? Kevin, the Moties are no less a threat
than ever, but our ability to Contain them is not adequate to the task."

     "So now what?"

     Bury looked through the Mosque's picture window and made a face.
Somewhere on the pale face of Base Six was Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo,
unreachable.

     He said, "One day's work at a time. We are to compose a message,
which the Moties will attempt to send for us. What shall we say?"

     "Think we're secure hero?" Renner asked

     Bury shrugged. "All of Nabil's skills were unable to detect
listening devices. I do not believe the Moties can be so confident that
they could plant a device with the certainty that we would not find it.
If we found one, it would very much affect our relationship. Let us act
as if there are no Moties listening, but not act as if we were certain
of it."

     "On that score, what happens when Ali Baba's with us?" Renner demanded.

     "Then we are faithful allies of East India," Bury said. Mediators
serve their own Masters."

     Renner nodded. "Blaine. Message."

     "A quick description of the situation, with all of the Alderson
geometry data we have," Blaine said. "Including all that data from the
Alexandria Library. That will make it a lot easier to get the Fleet in
here. Of course there's not much chance it will happen. Admiral the
Honorable Sir Harry Weigle. Sent out after Joyce Trujillo's first
articles. Assigned to clean up the corruption, put some discipline back
in the Crazy Eddie Squadron. He's doing a good job at that, but he's not
big on disobeying orders."

     "And his orders are to maintain the blockade," Renner said.

     "Just so."

     "What can we do to convince him?"

     Blaine thought for a moment. "He'd have to be convinced that he had
a higher duty than carrying out his orders

     "Could you persuade him?"

     Chris thought that one over. "Possibly. I can't reach him. You can.
So let's look at what he knows. The Alderson point back to New Cal has
moved. So has the Jump to the Mote, and he'll know that, but he probably
hasn't found it. It's dancing around down there inside a red giant star."

     "MacArthur found it easily enough thirty years ago," Bury reminded
them.

     "Different geometry. No jittery new star to distort the path,"

     Renner said. "Not that bloody easily, either. Trust me."

     Blaine nodded. "MacArthur and Lenin were specially equipped and had
some of the Empire's best scientists aboard, along with a top navigator.
Even then it took them a while to find the old one. So. We're going to
help him find the new Crazy Eddie point. That will start him off
thinking right. We give him information that helps him in his mission."

     Renner's nod prompted Blaine to continue: "The tricky thing is to
be sure we don't ask him to violate orders. Such as letting anything get
out of the star and through to New Cal."

     "So if we ask him to listen before he shoots."

     "He might do that," Blaine said. "It's worth a try."

 

 

     Eudoxus led her down and slantwise from the lounge. Vacuum gear
waited in an alcove a hundred meters below the Mosque. Joyce was taken
aback. This hadn't come from Sinbad!

     Eudoxus was watching. That irritating smile . . . hah. Joyce
recorded, "The Motie smile is rigid. It's always there. You don't
see     it on a Mediator unless she's not sending any other signal."

     Joyce donned a skintight pressure suit (it felt funny, comfortable
though), fishbowl helmet, thermal oversuit (lighter than she'd expected)
and mirror cloak. They looked archaic: they almost matched Empire Navy
specs of thirty years ago, altered to alien tastes."

     "Comfortable?"

     "Yes," she told Eudoxus. She was relieved. She'd thought they would
have to return to the Mosque. The helmet would reveal her face for the
pickup camera.

     Two of the little Messengers joined them. The party returned to the
tunnel as five puffy silver dolls. They passed through three  doors of a
massive airlock and out onto an icy surface.

     Frozen hydrogen, she remembered: fluffy, loosely packed, not
visibly different from water ice. Maybe crusted in water ice. How could
you tell? She didn't feel the cold.

     "These are handholds, all but the green and red," Eudoxus said.
"Don't lose your grip, Joyce. The Base is under acceleration."

     Joyce gripped a yellow-and-orange line. "Green and red?"

     "Green is superconductor cables. Red is fuel." Eudoxus was already
moving, jumping along the surface, the cable sliding through her hands.
"And the big translucent tubes are for transport."

     The gray ice curved sharply. The top of a dome showed beyond the
curve. In another direction, the Mosque cradled Sinbad. A bright red
spark looked over its shoulder: the Eye. In another, a violet
horizon-glow that had to be the fusion motors pushing Inner Base Six.

     Fabulous pictures! The kind of thing careers are founded on! She
chuckled to herself. Chris Blaine's frantic look! As if he'd told me
anything to begin with. As if the Moties could read my mind or my face.
What could Eudoxus see, anyway? I'm a big silver pillow.

     But if Joyce could see the Motie smile . . . less irritating, now
that she understood it . . . then Eudoxus could see her face, too.

     Eudoxus was taking them away from the motors: forward. Joyce
followed. The Warrior followed her, and the Messengers.

     The cable split; they followed yellow. It led over a small dome.
Moties looked up at Joyce through a glass bull's-eye and a forest of
dark green moss: three Whites, a Warrior, a Messenger, some Watchmakers.

     Eudoxus asked, "Joyce, what's with Horace Bury?"

     "What do you mean?'

     "Thirty years ago, he thought the Mote system was the way to get
rich. He couldn't see enough of anything. Now he seems much calmer, less
ambitious, more like a Keeper. But-"

     Joyce was amused. "He was already older than a man can get without
serious medical help. It's thirty years later."

     "There's more. He flinches when a Warrior comes near. All right, so
do you, I can understand that." Eudoxus had lost all trace of accent,
Joyce realized suddenly. "But he flinches from Watchmakers. Even from
the newborn, until he knows they are not Watchmakers."

     "They blindside him. His eyes can't be all that-"

     "No, Joyce, it's not their size. He likes the little Mediator pups,
once he knew what they are."

     Bury's attitude toward Moties was no secret within the Empire.
Rather the opposite. "He has always been afraid of you," Joyce said.
"Terrified, even. Since he returned from the first Mote expedition. But
that's changing. I can see it."

     "Why?"

     Joyce thought it over. Bury's attitude toward Moties was no secret,
but the cause of MacArthur's death was a Navy secret; secret from the
Moties, by order of the Privy Council. It was a good question, though.
What was changing Horace Bury? Greed, probably. "There are still vast
fortunes to be made. Power and influence, for Bury and his relatives."

     Three dissimilar spacecraft nursed from red cables that dipped into
the ice. Each ship was built as solidly as a safe. A transparent tube
ringed the ships; canisters and Moties of several sizes flew along
inside it.

     Eudoxus didn't try to stop Joyce from circling the ships with her
pickup camera running. Others-Chris, the Captain, Dr. Buckman-would
understand more than she did. She pointed her     pickup along the tube,
watching the Moties fly. Warriors, four Engineers, a Messenger.

     Eudoxus said, "We don't have to move this slowly, Joyce. The tube
is faster and you would still have a view."

     No accent, but an irritating richness, an overemphasis on
consonants- My voice! Eudoxus spoke with Joyce Trujillo's voice, exactly
as she sounded on video. "No, this is fine," she said. "I'm getting
great pictures."

     The Mediator led off. Aft, the glow of jets had faded to black sky

     Eudoxus stopped. Joyce and the Warrior caught up; Eudoxus spoke
briefly to the Warrior. Then her upper right arm pointed ahead and up.
"There, Joyce, what do you see in the sky?"

     Joyce followed the creature's long upper-right arm. "Just stars."

     "The Warrior says he's spotted it, the locus of your friends."

     "Do Warriors have good eyes?"

"Yes."

     Joyce tapped at the pickup, instructing it to find and fix on the
brightest spot in its field, narrow the field, zoom in. She raised it by
its sleeve, aligned along Eudoxus's arm, and set it going.

     The camera wriggled in its sleeve, gyros whirring. A wide field of
stars showed on the monitor screen. There: crumpled tinsel reflecting
dim sunlight, just bigger than a point. Joyce set the camera zooming.
Structure began to show, crumpled mirrors, a beehive torn open, violet
points that might be fusion torches or spacecraft.

     "Do you have it? It's a nest of war rats and Watchmakers. It's
being harvested by the Crimean Tartars."

     "Now follow my finger down to the horizon. A scattering of blue
points?"

     Joyce shook her head. Again she worked with the pickup.

     "I don't see it either, but Warriors can. That's a war fleet
bearing down on the nest."

     "Got it." It was as Eudoxus had said, a scattering of blue
pointsand no more.

     "Mostly Khanate ships. In four hours they will arrive at the rat
nest, but in twenty minutes the Tartars will be running. It's being
negotiated now. They'll rendezvous with Base Six as we pass, and they
have your friends."

     "Great! I should tell the Captain."

     "We will do that," Eudoxus said.

     "Good." Chris should have been here, she thought with satisfaction.
A sudden thought. "Have the Tartars become your allies?"

     And thus ours.

     "Perhaps. For the moment they are in mortal danger, and we offer
them refuge. For the future-what is the future, Joyce? The question is
not what place the Tartars have with Medina and East India, it is what
place have Moties in the universe."

     "I can't answer that."

     "No, but you must have thought about it."

     "Sure. A lot of people have." Interest in Moties flared and died
and flared again through the Empire, and the latest news would cause the
biggest flare of all. What to do about Moties would be the topic of
discussion everywhere. The Humanity League. The Imperial Senate. The
Navy League. The Imperial Traders Association. The editorial board of
her own news syndicate. Little old ladies at tea parties.

     She was beginning to notice the cold . . . or was it the dark? Her
body wasn't cold, she was sweating with the exercise, but the black sky
and gray ice pulled at her mind. They'd left the domes and ships behind.

     Eudoxus bounced alongside her, talking, with the Warrior at the
lead. "We've taken a great gamble, you know."

     "Yes."

     'If we could only understand one thing, we would feel far less at
risk. Your superiors seem to expect . . . what shall we call our
gathering of alliances? . . . expect the Medina Consortium to remain
stable, ultimately to speak for all of Mote system. How can they expect
that?"

     "I don't know." The Motie was too distant: Joyce couldn't see her
face. She wouldn't be able to see Joyce's either. But all discussions of
Moties came down to the same thing: there was no central Motie
government, and it didn't look as if there ever could be. How could
there be stable relations with a caldron of Motie families? Even the
real Genghis Khan hadn't been able to form a stable empire of Mongols...

     They'd reached a ring of domes wreathed in cables of all sizes and
colors, with a great ship rising out of the center. In the minuscule
gravity Joyce bounded to the crest of a dome and caught up a handhold
line. Joyce considered herself to be hard and fit, but this was hard
work . . . and the Warrior was alongside her in an instant, and here was
Eudoxus, too. Didn't Moties get tired faster than humans?

     Eudoxus spoke to the Warrior, who said little, and then switched to
Anglic. "A Master's ship is bigger, to house an entourage, and is built
for intelligence and communications and defense, and never for stealth.
In battle a Master may be left alive for later negotiations

     "Uh-huh." Joyce was filming the huge ship, retractable antennae,
the long cylinder that must be a weapon: ram tube, rocket magazine,
laser, whatever.

     "I have heard that your Empire prefers not to interfere with its
member cultures, but sometimes it must. Is that our fate?"

     "I don't know that, either, but it's got to be better than what
you've been doing." Joyce was surprised at her own vehemence. I sounded
just like my father, and I never thought of myself as an Imperialist.

     "Joyce, we have a great deal more to see. Shall we take a tube?"

     Fatigue made her irritable. "Eudoxus, they're too small. Anyway,
why would that be easier? We'd still have to move!"

     "No. Difference in air pressure moves us. To fit inside we must
deflate our oversuits. Let the Messengers follow with them."

     "Done."

 

 

     Victoria came into the humans' area of Cerberus. "Representatives
of houses allied with your Empire await you," she said. "Gather your
possessions. Particularly your trade goods. You will not be returning
here, and we may not be able to save this ship."

     The humans stared in astonishment. "What's happening?"

     Glenda Ruth demanded.

     "The Khanate comes. We have formed an alliance with Medina Trading.
Their representatives await you. They call themselves Mentor and Lord
Byron and you must assure them that you have been well treated. I trust
there will be no difficulty with that."

     "That's not a problem," Freddy said. "And I can afford to lose
Hecate, but just what's about to happen to us?"

     For answer Victoria pointed to an image on the telescope screen.
Vermin City continued to change, to dwindle. . . was rapidly melting
away, Glenda Ruth saw, leaving long bulges . . . slender spacecraft
emerging from the wreckage

     "Looks familiar," she said.

     Freddy laughed. "They're oversize copies of Hecate!"

     "You'll board the fastest of those. We're running away. Warriors
will delay the Khanate as long as they can, others will try to save this
ship and any others, but we will be matching velocities with your
friends, who appear to be aboard a sizable traveling fortress."

     "How fast will we be going?" Jennifer demanded.

     Victoria frowned. "As swiftly as possible. Three gravities-Mote
Prime gravities."

     Mote Prime was a lighter world. Freddy said, "Call it two and a
half standard gee. Terry-"

     "Terry can't take that," Jennifer said.

     "No. Victoria, thanks, but-"

     "You will not save your friend by being captured by the Khanate,"
Victoria said. "And they might not be quite as understanding about the
benefits of your cocoa. I am afraid I can leave you no choice here. Your
friends will forgive us for leaving behind one human, wounded in
activities he insisted on joining. They will not be so kind if we
abandon you all. Come."

     "I'm staying," Jennifer said. "Glenda Ruth, you and Freddy go.
Victoria's right, you're important, and it won't matter how it happened,
the Empire won't accept it if you're lost. But someone has to take care
of Terry, and you can tell them I insisted. Pollyanna-"

     "Stay with Jennifer," the Motie said. Her voice was Jennifer's
accent but in a lower register.

     "Whatever we do, it must be done quickly," Victoria warned.

     "A Khanate battle squadron approaches, and your friends are
impatient to talk to you.'

     "Battle squadron. How reasonable will they be?" Glenda
Ruthdemanded. "Would they talk?"

     "Mediators will always talk when there is not active fighting.
Sometimes then. Whether the Mediator with this expedition can speak your
language is another matter, of course. You will have Pollyanna to help."

     "I will help you talk," the Mediator pup hugged her. She said,
"You're not trying to talk me out of staying."

     "I had hoped you would stay," Victoria said. "Your Terry might then
survive until Medina can buy him back from the Khanate. Without your
help I do not think so."

     "I don't like this much," Freddy said. "Glenda Ruth?"

     "Victoria, how will you leave them?'

     Victoria chattered rapidly to a Warrior. The Warrior answered
briefly. Victoria said, "We can leave you Cerberus, minus our own life
support segments, and a Warrior pilot and motors to give half a gee . .
. in fact, you should have Hecate's motor of alien design, to indicate
your nature. Jennifer, you might be overlooked, and if so, Medina will
find you. I regret we cannot allow Dr. Doolittle to accompany you'

     "What are their chances of escape?" Glenda Ruth persisted.

     "Not good," Freddy said. "Stealthing is fine, but Cerberus needs
thrust to get away from here, and they'll see that."

     Victoria shrugged. "This is likely. If we delay much longer, none
of this will matter. I will also leave recordings in the trade language,
informing the Khanate that they have a valuable possession which those
more powerful than the Khans will wish to buy back, but only if intact."

     "Go on, Glenda Ruth," Jennifer said. "It's the best we're going to
get."

     "Come," said the Mediator. "Come meet the representatives of your
friends."

 

 

     The Warrior led; then Joyce, then Eudoxus, all in skintights and
helmets. Air pressure wafted them down the tube. Their insulating
oversuits followed, collapsed, with two little Messengers to tend them.

     Eudoxus said, "Bury's Fyunch(click) brought us tales of swimming.
Is it like this?"

     "A little," Joyce said. The currents kept her from brushing the
sides. She drifted like seaweed, in a dead man's float.

     An industrial complex wafted by, brightly lighted. Where the tube
curved, she could see Watchmakers following her, a swarm of them
bracketed by two Engineers.

     "Crazy Eddie always misreads the turning of the cycles," Eudoxus
said. "Crazy Eddie tries to arrest the turning, to make a civilization
that will last for all time. What do humans think of Crazy Eddie, Joyce?"

     "I suppose we think he's crazy." Silence prompted her to continue,
"Not all that crazy, though. Our cycles of history, they go up and down
but generally up. A spiral. We don't just go round and round. We learn."

     "So you use the term without embarrassment. Crazy Eddie point our
term, yes, but you don't flinch from it. Crazy Eddie Squadron. Joyce,
you've studied the Crazy Eddie Squadron?"

     My views are on record, Eudoxus, and you can't have the records.
Navy matters." How the hell had Eudoxus learned that? Was there a hole
Chris hadn't plugged? So to speak.

     "We are allies. It seems unfair that we cannot know what you have
told every casual inhabitant of the Empire."

     "Unfair. Yes, it is, but it's still not my decision, Eudoxus. I
took an oath."

     The Motie said, "Yes, of course. Joyce, nobody loves blockade duty.
The Squadron is crumbling, isn't it? The opening of the Sister is not a
bad thing for you, but how can your companions expect to create
stability here?"

     Good question, and Joyce didn't know. The Empire had something,
though. Something to do with the Institute, Joyce thought, and the Crazy
Eddie Worm. Joyce knew only the name, and even that she must keep
secret. Why? But the Mediator was behind her; her view was of Joyce's
feet, not her face.

     "Mote Prime sent you ambassadors," Eudoxus said. A Keeper and two
Mediators. You've had thirty years to study them. We've studied billions
of ourselves for millions of years. What can you possibly have learned
that we could not?"

     "Eudoxus, I am not supposed to talk about this."

     "The Imperials have told you very little, haven't they, Joyce? They
didn't trust you to keep secrets."

     "That's right. So there's not much point in this, is there?"

     "Yet you are a public opinion specialist. You are heard throughout
the Empire. Joyce, it is clear that your Empire is united as the Moties
have never been, but not every family is obedient. Has your Empire the
strength to exterminate us? Is this your real plan?"

     "No, we don't plan that!"

     "Are you so sure? No secret weapons? Ah, but they would nottell
you. Joyce, look ahead and up."

     The ball of crumpled tinsel was a larger point among the stars.
Violet sparks were rising from it. Joyce trained her pickup and spoke
for continuity. "Spacecraft are rising to meet us, bringing the human
hostages captured by the group our Motie allies call the Crimean
Tartars. The humans are Glenda Ruth Fowler Blaine. The Hon. Frederick
Townsend. Jennifer Banda of the Blaine Institute. And an engineer
crewman, Terry Kakumi. . . Eudoxus, when can we talk to them? To the
people who were in that ship? Did they get any pictures of the war rats?
What are war rats?"

     "In due time. When your friends arrive. For now-we should show you
the motors."

     Joyce looked up. The crumpled ball and its sparks were setting, and
the violet-white glow of Base Six's motors was coming into view ahead.
"Yes," said Joyce. "Please."

     Eudoxus spoke into his hand. Mediators ruled all transport, Joyce
remembered. And sometimes sat in judgment. The wind that moved them
almost died; then the tube branched, and pressure wafted them left.

     "We knew that Glenda Ruth Blaine must be daughter to Sally Fowler
and Roderick Blaine, and the Honorable Frederick Townsend son to another
powerful master, but we don't know of a Blaine Institute

     "It's a school, but it does research."

     "I thought you called such organizations 'universities.'"

     "Yes, that's right, the Blaine Institute is like a university,
deliberately located next to a university, but universities everything.
The Blaine Institute has only one purpose. To study Moties."

     "Ah. Was this Institute responsible for the blockade?"

     "No, that was Imperial policy. Although Lord and Lady Blaine helped
set the policy even as they were founding the Institute. And Lady
Blaine's uncle. But the blockade was proclaimed before I was born."
Instead of an extermination fleet. The Mediator still couldn't see her
face: right. "You can't imagine the impact you made on the Empire. Just
your existence."

     "Do you have children?"

     "No. Not yet."

     "You will have?"

     "Lot's leave it at 'not yet.'"

     Neither do I, of course. But I'll see your Motie impact on the
Empire and raise you not getting pregnant until you happen to feel like it!"

     Jennifer's ears felt scorched.

     Eudoxus said, "Never mind. I might guess the Empire's reaction,
knowing that we've solved your inbuilt reason for making war and then
invented our own.'

     "How so?"

     "Mediators prevent misunderstanding," Eudoxus said. "Moties will
fight for territory and power and resources for their descendants, but
if there's a way to avoid fighting, the Mediators will find it. You
fight because messages are badly worded

"Oh. And invented your own, yes, of course. If you don't get pregnant,
you die. And Mediators don't get pregnant." I should just shut my face
and give it a vacation, Joyce thought.

     "The Institute, is it considered a success?"

     "It gets the best minds in the Empire."

     "Yes. But such structures always freeze up, don't they? They get
old and can't react anymore, like the Blockade Fleet."

     "Oh . . . generally." But she hadn't heard that about Blaine
Institute. "Ossified is the word you want."

     "So they study Moties and nothing else, and they have not yet
become ossified. Will they study ways to kill Moties?"

     "Don't be absurd! You've met Chris Blaine. His parents own the
Institute. What do you think?"

     "I think he has secrets, some terrible," Eudoxus said.

     So do I. Maybe enough of this. But . . . she can't see my face, so
what is she reading?

     But I'm a reporter, I'm as good at controlling my face as any
politico or poker player. But they put me in a silver balloon and let me
get complacent and then snaked me out of it, and who ever taught me to
control the muscles in my damn feet?

 

 

     "Joyce, it's important. What did you tell them?" Renner asked.

     "Nothing at all," she said, and laughed. "Look, you don't have to
keep asking. I taped it all. Here."

     "Thanks. Blaine, let's look at this."

     The voices were identical: Joyce Trujillo's voice, recognizable
Empire-wide. The only way to tell them apart was through context. This
was the alien speaking: "I think he has secrets, some terrible."

     "What do you think she meant?" Renner asked.

     Chris Blaine frowned. "I don't know. But notice the context, just
after Eudoxus asked if the Institute was set up to find ways to kill
Moties. If I'm reading Eudoxus right-pity the camera wasn't on her much-"

     "How could it have been?"

     "I know, Joyce. Now, if I read this right, Eudoxus is convinced
that Joyce doesn't believe the Institute is for making Moties extinct,
but that hasn't laid all suspicions to rest."

     "Anything we can do about that?"

     "I'll think on it. I have some general recordings about the
Institute, mostly promo stuff, but they might help. We'll give them to
Eudoxus."

"Better review them first."

     "Sir, I did already. There's nothing about the Empire they won't
already know. I was holding off in case I might be wrong, but now..."

     "Okay. Sounds reasonable. Anything else?"

     "Only the message to Weigle. It should go while East India is still
willing and able to deliver it."

 

 

     "That should do it," Chris Blaine said. He held a message cube.
"All the Alderson data we can find including the stuff from Alexandria.
The Admiral shouldn't have any trouble finding the new Crazy Eddie
point. Now it's your turn, Captain. Remember, heavy on duty. You can't
lay that on too thick."

Renner took the cube. "Thanks. I'll be a while, and I have to be alone."
He waited until the others had left, then inserted the cube into the
recorder and began to dictate.

     "And that's the situation as we see it," he concluded. "The Moties
are ripe for an alliance. It's dicey, but there may never be a better
chance.

"I don't believe we have the power to exterminate the Moties.

There are too many of them, too many independent families, scattered
through the rocks and the moons and the comets."

     "We can't exterminate them, and we never expected to maintain the
blockade forever, and now we'd need two blockades. My assessment is that
we'd do better to try for an alliance using the Crazy Eddie Worm to help
control Motie breeding. Of course we don't know what the Motie reaction
to the worm will be, and we won't know for another forty or fifty hours.
I don't think I should wait that long. Right now Medina Trading and East
India are cooperating to send this, and they have the means to get the
message through. God knows what can happen in fifty hours."

     "Kevin J. Renner, Captain, Imperial Navy Intelligence; Acting
Commodore, Second Mote Expedition. Authentication follows."

The authentication was more trouble than the message had been. Renner
stretched a metallic band around his forehead and attached its cable to
a small hand-held computer. Then he plugged in earphones and leaned back
to relax.

"Hi," a contralto voice said. "Your name?"

"Kevin James Renner." "Do you eat live snails?"

"I'll eat anything."

"Where were you born?"

"Dionysius."

"Are you alone?"

"Quite alone."

"What's the word?"

"Hollyhocks."

"Are you sure?"

"Sure I'm sure, you stupid machine."

"Let's try it again. What's the word?"

"Hollyhocks."

"Sure it's not rosebuds?"

"Hollyhocks."

"My instructions are to be certain you are calm and uncoerced."

"Damn it, I am calm and uncoerced

"Right. If you'll attach me to the message cube recorder."

"You're on."

     "Stand by. This may take a while."

     Renner waited as seven minutes went by.

     "Done. You may disconnect."

     Renner took out the message cube. It was encrypted in a code that
could only be read by an admiral or at a Navy Sector Headquarters; and
the authentication code identified it as coming from a very senior
official of Imperial Naval Intelligence. The only way to get that
authentication was to convince the encrypting device that you really
wanted it done. Any deviation from the script would have produced an
authentication sequence that proclaimed the sender was under duress or
wasn't the proper sender. Or so Renner had been told.

     Renner punched the intercom. "Okay, Blaine, here it is. You sure
the Moties can manage to duplicate this at long range?" If the Moties
couldn't do that, the cube itself would have to be sent, and that would
take days, if it got through at all.

     "They're sure. We sent the details of the message cube system to
the East India group at the Crazy Eddie point. They've built a recording
device. Now we send the encrypted message, they record it onto a cube,
and pop it through."

     "Fine."

"Now what?" Joyce asked.

"Now we wait," Renner said. "For the Tartars.'

 

 

5 The Guns of Medina Mosque

 

 

Diplomacy is the art of saying "Nice doggie" whilst you find a rock.

 

-Attributed to Talleyrand

 

 

A day or three ago, the Great Hall must have been solid ice. This day it
occupied half the volume of the Mosque. It was lavishly decorated:
Renner recognized a modified illustration from A Thousand Nights and a
Night. Tapestries with fantastic decorations: a djinn, a roc, Baghdad as
it might have been in the twelfth century. The carpets were soft with
unmistakably Saracen designs. There were also certain anachronisms: the
big viewscroen on one wall, the opposite wall a vast curve of glass
'ooking out onto the ice,

     The screen showed another region of Inner Base Six, and a ship
dropping through the iceball's black Langston Field sky.

     Horace Bury paced, looking very relaxed, bobbing as if underwater
in the low gravity of Base Six. He hadn't noticed that Joyce's pickup
camera was on him. All Baba bobbed along beside him, a perfect
half-scale mime.

     It was a funny sight. Kevin Renner saw that, but he found that
command has its own emotions: he had to look beyond humor, and beyond
calling attention to humor. There was a lot at stake here, and the
responsibility fell squarely on Kevin Renner. And that's what Captain
Blaine felt, back at the Mote. That and his reluctant tolerance for the
smartass Sailing Master.

     "Almost neutral territory," Eudoxus said. "Our base, but your part
of it, a place where Commodore Renner may come and yet retain control of
his ship. Excellency, this is to be a formal reception. Are you certain
you will not invite any of the crew of Atropos? To act as entourage.
Warriors, for instance."

     Is that really important?" Renner asked.

     "It is important," Horace Bury said. "But it is also important that
all Motie groups understand us as we begin to understand you. Moties and
humans must modify their customs when they meet. Let us begin now."

     Eudoxus bowed. "As you wish."

     Chris Blaine watched the alien ship descend. "Looks like a racing
yacht," Blaine said. "But bigger."

     Eudoxus said, "I had wondered at the strange design. The Crimean
Tartars must have taken considerable resources from the vermin city."

     And your Engineers will already be examining everything about that
ship, Renner thought. Moties aren't just innovative, they're adaptive.

     The ship docked in a pattern of concentric scarlet circles, onto a
platform that began to descend at once. As it sank from sight, Eudoxus
listened to a handset. "They're down. Do you wish to see your friends
disembark?"

     "Of course," Renner said. Bury and Ali Baba turned as one.

     The screen blinked, then showed an opening airlock. A Warrior
emerged into the pressurized reception lock, then a Mediator with an odd
marking pattern. Glenda Ruth Blaine followed, clutching a sealed
carrying case to her chest. After her came a young man in space
coveralls who carried a Mediator pup in his arms. Two Warriors and a
young Master followed them.

     "Only two." Bury and Ali Baba were bristling. "We had understood
there were four?"

     "Yes, Excellency. We are only now learning the details. One of the
four insisted on filming the cleansing of Vermin City. He was hurt. His
wounds were serious, life threatening. The Tartars have not ceased to
tell us of the resources expended in saving his life.

     "But when the Khanate ships were seen to be attacking, all realized
that Terry Kakumi would not survive the acceleration required to escape.
He was cast adrift. His female companion insisted on accompanying him."

     "And thereby hangs a tale," Renner said. He looked at Blaine and
got a slight nod. "And what has happened to them since then?"

     "I have not been told," Eudoxus said.

     The handset squawked. Eudoxus listened for a moment. "Your friends
seem to be of two minds. They wish to see you immediately, but they are
concerned that their appearance might lead you to suspect they have not
been well treated."

     "Tell 'em we've already seen them on-screen," Renner said. 'With
war fleets coming at us from all directions I don't think we have a lot
of time to waste washing up. Eudoxus, can Medina Trading send someone to
rescue the other humans?"

     "I will learn."

'Adrift,' you said," Joyce noted.

     Eudoxus shrugged. What better word?"

     Blaine said, "Cast loose at low thrust, concealed but with a
transponder beacon that will answer if pulsed with the right signals.
Right?"

     "I have not been told, but I assume so. We will do what we can to
rescue them, but I suspect we must simply buy them from the Khanate."

     "Buy how?" Joyce demanded.

     "A matter for negotiation," Eudoxus said. "And not yet."

     Renner prompted her. "Why not yet?"

     "Kevin, the Khanate Axis cannot themselves know what they will
want. You have seen the pattern of their movement as well as I." She
gestured toward the screen, which now showed points of light clustered
around nothing whatever. "They wished to control the Sister. This they
attained. Now they assemble their strength so that they can send through
their war fleet. They wish to escape into your Empire, as we would have
done if you had not been present to meet us, but the Khanate will not
talk or bargain first. They have this advantage over us: they know that
ships went through and lived to return, something that no ship ever did
before. Now they believe that surprise is their best weapon, victory
their best bargaining tool. Is it not clear to you?"

     Blaine nodded. "Clear enough.'

     "But that's horrible!" Joyce said. "Captain Renner, shouldn't you
be doing something?"

     Renner's eyes fell on her without interest; wandered back to the
screen. Mediators ruled information flow; this would be as good as
anything Atropos could tell him. The Khanate was gathering. They would
involve all the allies they could persuade to break free into the wide
universe: every family within a billion miles, likely, excepting those
who flew Medina's banner. All ready to flash through to MGC-R-31, where
Balasingham waited with Agornemnon and whatever reinforcements might
have reached him. If they broke past Agamemnon, they would be loose in
the Empire.

     The Khanate Axis. How would they work it? By long odds, they would
soon have Jennifer Banda to describe Agamemnon and MGC-R-31 as she'd
last seen them. Terry Kakumi might be used to persuade her. By now one
of their allies might have brought a Bury Fyunch(click) to read her
face. Jennifer could translate, could convey surrender terms . . . in
either direction.

     But what was Commodore Renner to do about it? He must talk to
Glenda Ruth, soon. Was Agamemnon holding the MGC-R-31 system alone, or
did other Navy ships arrive before Hecate came through? What had she
done with the C-L worm? "Eudoxus..."

     "We will fight, of course," Eudoxus said. "All of the strength of
East India and Medina assembles. We have sent messages to Byzantium, and
their war fleets are gathering. The Khanate Axis will send their
Warriors through to fight whatever they find on the far side of the
Sister, but they must leave their Masters safe on this side. Those ships
we can attack, but we must know what contributions you humans can make."

     "War for the stars," Joyce said, awed.

     "Here are your friends," Eudoxus said. The outer door of the Great
Hall opened. It had been made wide, so that a number could come through
it at once.

     Warriors streamed in and took places along the walls. They were
followed by Admiral Mustapha Pasha, Master of Base Six. Behind that
group came new, strange Moties, and two humans; and with them were other
Mediators, a small group of Warriors who huddled around two Masters, and
a scattering of other forms including a Doctor.

     That must be Freddy Townsend, with a Mediator pup riding his
shoulder. The box in Glenda Ruth's arms threw her balance off. She
settled it and stepped away. She was radiating joy like a summer day as
she turned to her brother; but Lieutenant Blaine was entirely absorbed
by the Moties.

     Eudoxus spoke slowly, formally, in the trade language. The visiting
Mediator answered. "Victoria," Glenda Ruth said, and waved, but Victoria
didn't notice. East India spoke. Blaine was trying to follow it, and so
was Glenda Ruth . . . and then brother and sister grimaced at each other
because all the Mediators were talking faster and faster. Twisted bodies
shifted, danced. Renner was awed. Before his eyes and Joyce's camera,
they were turning the skeletal trade koine into a language. The
Mediators broke off to speak to the Masters, then resumed their gabble.
The Masters spoke, first one of the newcomers, then Admiral Mustapha.

     And every Warrior jumped straight into the air.

     Glenda Ruth screamed, "No, no, it's a gun, Victoria! You point it!"

     The Warriors ringed the ceiling and their weapons ringed the
humans. They could fire, now, without hitting each other. Two Engineers
and a dozen Watchmakers scrambled forward. Victoria shouted at the
Masters, at the other Mediators. They gabbled, while Watchmakers
surrounded Glenda Ruth's box and began spraying it with plastic foam.
Every Motie Warrior held a weapon, and every weapon was pointed at a human.

     Kevin hadn't gone for his pistol, and neither had anyone else. His
only real weapon was Atropos. If the Masters had cut his communications,
then Atropos would be on alert status now.

     "I presume there is an explanation for this rather startling
behavior," Bury said.

     "Your Crazy Eddie Worm," Eudoxus said. "A boon to Mediators! But
terrible for Masters. You knew of it and did not tell us. Joyce knew and
would not tell us."

     Joyce drew in a breath to speak but held it in. Her neck and cheeks
flushed pink, then red.

     "Our natural suspicion," Eudoxus continued, apparently to all of
them, "is that your altered parasite is a means of making Motie life
extinct. You would not consider this suggestion insane, would you,
knowing what Victoria has just told us? Kevin, you did not instantly
describe the Crazy Eddie Worm. You were much disturbed when you knew
that you were going not to Mote Prime, where winds might distribute your
parasite, but to a domain where spacecraft must bring the worm to an
infinity of closed environments-I see my point is made. So. I fear some
tension remains, Excellency, until we again reach understanding. It is,
after all, not too late for us to join forces with the Khanate."

     "Endless war," Chris Blaine said.

     "Preferable to extinction. Glenda Ruth, what did you mean-"

     She cried, "But it's for you! It doesn't reproduce except under
controlled conditions. You can point it, like a gun. You win a battle,
you don't have to kill your enemies. You give them the Crazy Eddie Worm
instead, and now they're Keepers, conservative-"

     Eudoxus waved her silent. He spoke rapidly to Victoria. They
gabbled. A Master spoke. Eudoxus asked Glenda Ruth, "Do you wish to
change anything you told Victoria? So. Lieutenant Blaine, tell me what
you know of this. Quickly."

     "His Excellency knows more than I do."

     "Excellency?" The tone held respect; but the Warriors clung to the
roof, their weapons tracking back and forth among the humans.

     Quietly, calmly, moving slowly so as not to startle any Warrior,
Bury had linked himself to Nabil's medical package. The displays were
alive and the lines they drew were turning jagged. Bury wasn't as calm
as he looked. Ali Baba regarded the displays with interest.

     Bury said, "I know this. One of King Peter's Mediators was alive
when I was last on Sparta. Less than a Mote year ago. Alive. I was told
that this was due to the action of a genetically altered parasite."

     "And you believe this?" Omar asked. "Truly, Excellency?"

     "Certainly those who told me believed it, as do all those here.
Yes. I believe."

     "You fear Moties," Eudoxus said. "The Bury who came to Mote Prime
did not, but you do. When we first spoke to you, I was surprised to see
that. Yet since you came here, that, too, has changed. What has happened
to change you, you of all humans, not once but twice? Speak truth,
Excellency."

     "The first is a Navy secret," Bury said.

     Enough. Kevin Renner said, "Watchmakers destroyed the battleship
MacArthur. Civilians had to be evacuated by lines across vacuum to
Lenin. Horace was almost there when he realized that the man crawling up
behind him was a pressure suit full of Watchmakers. He fought them off
with his suitcase and his oxygen tank. Okay, Horace?"

     "No longer secret, then." The lines were turning choppy. "There was
worse. I had intended to bring Watchmakers to the Empire, to aid in
building my fortune. Then I saw the danger. The war of all against all,
and I nearly caused it."

     "We have pictures to top that," Glenda Ruth said. "Wait'll you see
Vermin City, Your Excellency!"

     Bury looked at her. "Wonderful." To Eudoxus: "You must understand,
I enjoy the company of Mediators. Even half-grown Mediators, yes, Ali Baba?"

"Certainly, Excellency- "And Watchmakers would be fantastically useful,
fantastically valuable in Empire space. But that was not to be. Your
society- is much like that of the Arabs before the Prophet. Infanticide.
Genocide. No other way to control your population. And after the
Prophet, we burst forth to conquer, but we had not learned how to live
with other cultures." Bury shrugged. "Nor had others learned to live
with us, and this was still true when I last visited your star system."

     "And you have learned now?" Eudoxus demanded.

     "Yes. We have learned, the Empire has learned. The Arabs have found
a place within the Empire. We are not yet as honored as we would wish to
be, but we have a place that is not without honor. We are free to govern
ourselves, and we can travel among the Imperial planets. As you see that
I do."

     "You are tolerated."

     "No, Eudoxus, we are accepted. Not by all, enough, and that, too,
will change."

     "And you see us in that role?"

     "Provided that you accept our terms."

     Eudoxus turned and spoke slowly in the newly adapted trade
language. Admiral Mustapha spoke briefly. Eudoxus turned. The Warriors
had not moved

     "Your terms?" Eudoxus demanded.

     Bury smiled. "Of course we cannot speak for the Empire, but I know
what those terms will be. First, there is to be one Motie government.
That government will see that no Motie leaves the Mote system without
carrying the stabilizing parasite. Within the Mote system-well, I
suspect that is all negotiable. Kevin, would you not agree?'

     "Mmm . . . yes. The notion is generally that you keep your own
house clean. Mote system is to be one government, kept that way by Mote
citizenry. We've had at least one piece of luck, Eudoxus. Mote Prime is
. .. eighty, ninety percent of your population? But they're not a
consideration because Medina Concordance can keep them bottled up. That
is, if you can hold the rest of the system in your gripping hand."

     A Master spoke. Six Watchmakers finally ceased spraying foam
plastic on a sphere that was now two meters across. Moties resumed their
rapid conversation. Abruptly Eudoxus turned to Renner. "The worm is the
heart of your strategy. Must we examine it?"

 

     We have holograms," Glenda Ruth said. "Victoria has records, too.
Why not save it? You don't have anyone to use it on yet."

     "Victoria tells us different, Glenda Ruth, and I'm amazed that you
could forget. For Mediators, the Crazy Eddie Worm extends our life span
at least twenty years. We're being very careful not to let that sway our
judgment."

     "Judgment," Bury said. "That is your real purpose, isn't it? Not
mere obedience, and more than negotiation. Judgment. In your zeal for
fairness, think on a Mote society in which Mediators live long enough to
learn for themselves."

     "We have," Omar said. "Excellency, you speak of holding the Mote
system. Will the Empire help?"

     "Of course," Renner said.

     "Defending System unity is Imperial policy," Joyce Trujillo said.
"They're already keeping the Blockade Fleet. Expensive, with no return.
Trade with the Moties will be so profitable that the costs of helping
you to keep order in here won't matter. His Excellency can tell you-"

     "None of this requires extraordinary intelligence for
understanding," Bury said.

     "True," Omar said. "Excellency, it appears that your Crazy Eddie
Worm truly is the key to human and Motie cooperation."

     The Mediators began their gabble again, each to his own Master.
Admiral Mustapha listened, then spoke rapidly.

     "The Admiral agrees," Eudoxus said. "The question now becomes, what
shall we do about the Khanate?"

     Kevin Renner thought hard. "Horace-do we trust them, Horace?"

     "They trust us." Bury swept a hand to indicate the Warriors who now
hung relaxed, their weapons holstered, though still in place. Ally had
turned enemy had turned ally, and no Warrior seemed surprised.

     "Right. Glenda Ruth, what was the situation beyond the Sister when
you left?"

     'Not much different from when you came through. Agamemnon was on
guard at the Alderson point leading out of the red dwarf system. There
were three Motie ships waiting there with Agamemnon. Reinforcements from
New Caledonia were expected, but hadn't arrived. But that was hundreds
of hours ago."

     "Thank you," Renner said. But they didn't have any ships to send.
Meaning we better assume there aren't any. "They'll send their fleet
through. What happens if we attack the Masters that stay behind?" Renner
asked.

     "They'll send for their Warriors."

     "The whole fleet?"

     Eudoxus spoke with the Master of Base Six. Another Master got
involved, then two Warriors and an Engineer. Ultimately Eudoxus said,
'As I surmised. Dividing one's forces is rarely a good idea. They will
bring back all of their fleet."

     "Nothing to gain. Why did they try it at all?"

     "We surmise that they did not anticipate our use of Inner Base Six.
We've already built up a respectable velocity for several hundred ships
and an enormous fuel dump. They believe they have time to clear a path
beyond the Sister. We can deny them that time. Still, Kevin-"

     'Good. Then what we do is get in position, wait until their battle
fleet goes through the Sister, and pounce."

     "And when their fleet comes back?" Omar asked. "Several thousand
ships."

     "We cross that bridge when we come to it," Renner said.

     "And hope the horse can sing," Glenda Ruth added, but she spoke so
softly that no one but Renner could hear her.

 

 

6 Judgment

 

 

First ponder, then dare.

 

-Helmuth von Moltke

 

 

"No," Kevin Renner said. "Damn it, we're going into a battle!"

     "I'm the only correspondent present," Joyce said. "An opportunity
of a lifetime, and you can't say no!"

     "You'll slow us down."

"Not I, Commodore Renner. With His Excellency aboard you're limited in
how fast you can go to begin with."

     "Horace."

     Bury was pacing a contorted path through Sinbad's crowded cabin:
his last chance to inspect his altered ship. "Ms. Trujillo is correct,
of course. Yet I must come. This is my ship, and I have messages to
send, orders to give, that I can only give personally." Bury waved
toward the new control panel. "Sinbad is better defended than she has
ever been. And all that is irrelevant. Kevin, if we do not win, no one
in the Empire is safe. Having Joyce aboard will not change that and will
not lessen our chances."

     So who do we leave behind?"

     "Jacob, I think. Nabil-"

     The old man hissed in surprise. "Please, Excellency, I have served
you for all of my life."

     "Serve me now. Hold this message cube in safety aboard Base Six,"
Bury said. "Cynthia-"

     "I think I should be with you, Excellency."

     "Then we agree, because that was what I was about to say."

     All touching, but we have no time," Jacob Buckman said. "Horace, I
think you're crazy, but good luck." He shook Bury's hand and held it an
instant longer. "We-"

     "Good-bye, Jacob."

     "UM. Yes." He turned and joined Eudoxus and the others who would
stay on Base Six.

     "Mother isn't going to like this," Chris Blaine said. He took his
sister by the shoulders. "Commander Rawlins is right. They need one of
us here on Sinbad, and I'll be more useful on Atropos."

     "If we don't bring this off, nobody's safe," Freddy Townsend said.
"Anywhere. Not even Sparta."

     Renner nodded to his new copilot. "I'm afraid you're right, Freddy.
Okay, secure the airlocks. Everybody strap in."

     Sinbad was intensely crowded. The Motie Engineers had reworked
Sinbad's interior and added a fuel tank outboard, where the add-on cabin
had been. The control bridge held two couches for humans. It was bounded
by collapsing doors that opened onto the main lounge. There they had
built shaped acceleration couches for two Mediators and two Engineers,
each with a Watchmaker, as well as couches for the other humans. Sinbad
looked cluttered, with incomprehensible gadgetry attached at odd angles
wherever there was space for it.

     Cynthia had Bury tethered into his water bed. Bury watched the
Moties settle in.

     "They've all got the worm," Kevin said.

     'Yes. And how does it affect these cursed little Motie brownies? We
test it here for the first time!"

     "We may need them for damage control," Renner said. "Omar, can you
keep them from mucking about with the ship? The last thing I need is to
have the control system rebuilt."

     "They will do nothing without orders." Omar took his place next to
Victoria of the Crimean Tartars. "Your MacArthur was safe until the
Engineer died. A Medina Engineer, Kevin. Even then a Medina Master or
Engineer could have saved her. But-"

     "But we didn't allow any communications with the Engineer or the
Watchmakers, and Medina was already fleeing from King Peter," Renner
finished.

     "Precisely. It was not all your doing. After the arrival of King

Peter's ship it would have been very difficult for you to communicate
with Medina."

Renner nodded to himself. Even then, thirty years ago, the Moties had
known more than the humans suspected. And what did they know now? But
there was work to do.

     "Rawlins?" A screen showed the commander of Atropos watching
Sinbad's chaos with concealed disapproval. "Let us get well clear before
you move in and refuel," Renner said.

     "Aye, aye. Godspeed, Commodore."

     "Thank you."

     Refuel only. No Motie would ever touch Atropos. Paranoid, but am I
paranoid enough? After thirty years with Horace Bury? Renner said, "All
right, Mr. Townsend, let's launch."

 

     An hour after Sinbad's departure, Rawlins called to report launch
from Inner Base Six with full tanks.

     One of Renner's screens displayed Atropos as a black dot on a
violet-white glare. Another display, unmagnified, showed violet dots
weaving a slow pattern about Sinbad. Another showed Commander Rawlins
sprawled in his acceleration chair, and Chris Blaine behind him in a
similar couch. The strain of three-gee acceleration showed in both faces.

     "First things," Renner said. "The Moties report that our message to
the Crazy Eddie Fleet went through as planned. No way to know if the
Admiral got it."

     "But he ought to," Rawlins said, "And no way to know what he'll do
about it."

"Right," Renner said. "Anyway, for once things are pretty simple."

     Rawlins lifted an eyebrow with some effort. "If so, it's the first
time."

     "Yeah. Bury and I have discussed the Khanate's options with the
Moties, and we're all pretty much agreed on how things have to be.
They've got two options. Plan A, they go through the Sister with
everything they've got, hit whatever's waiting, and get through into
Empire space, where they scatter. The Khanate is used to living off slim
pickings: give them any kind of a system, and they'll soon be breeding
like mad, if they can get their colony ships through."

     Rawlins said, "What's to stop them? Why have a Plan B?"

     "Well, they don't know they can get through," Renner said. "Or what
they'll find when they do."

     "They're risking everything they have," Glenda Ruth said. "Those
colony ships are the Khanate. Everything they have, and they don't
really know what they're facing. By now they'll have Terry and Jennifer,
so they'll know Agamemnon was all there was a couple of hundred hours ago."

     "Pity that engineer didn't just get himself killed," Rawlins said.

     Freddy bridled; Renner spoke quickly to head him off. "What they
don't know, because nobody on Hecate could know, is what reinforcements
Agamemnon may have picked up."

     "It won't be a lot," Rawlins said. "But maybe something. We did
have some ships under repair, and this wouldn't be the first time
Sinclair and his crew at the Yards passed a miracle."

     "We're presuming they can talk to Terry and Jennifer," Freddy
Townsend said. "The first Tartar group couldn't."

     "The Khanate is richer than the Tartars," Glenda Ruth said. "They
could have bought a half-trained Bury Fyunch(click) by now. I hope so."

     "Why?" Rawlins asked.

     "Jennifer admires Bury," Glenda Ruth said. "And she's impressed by
the Empire. She'll be sure there'll be a big fleet with Agamemnon
because she's got a romantic view of our competence. If they could talk
to Joyce, it would be a different-"

     "Now, Glenda Ruth, I don't-"

     "We can hope," Renner said. "It may have happened that way.
Whatever the Khanate learned from Jennifer Banda and Terry Kakumi,
they're playing it plenty cautious. They're sending their warships
through, but so far they've left their Masters behind. Those are still
in Mote system with nothing but a corporal's guard."

     Renner touched the screen controls and brought up images of the
remaining Khanate ships. They were big ships, like civilian cruise ships
in the Empire, and not one resembled any other. They were accompanied by
a score of smaller ships.

     "Two dozen-actually twenty-six of the big ships. That's the target.
The thing is, a Master's family and entourage are a colony. Those are
all the Masters and everything they need to survive, plants, symbiotes,
useful Classes, everything. Each family a little colony.

     "We go after those. Medina is vectoring everything onto those
ships. So are East India and the Tartars. Byzantium has agreed to help.
In about twenty hours, things are going to be plenty hot for the Khanate
Masters."

     "That part I understand. Fine by me," Rawlins said.

Blaine said, "It won't be a surprise attack by the time we hit them, but
right now they don't know how fast we're coming. They won't have
factored in the boost from Inner Base Six. The Medina Alliance is bigger
than they thought, too, as they'll soon find out. So-what choices do
they have? Either they pop through to get support from their war fleet,
or they send for help. Quite possibly both, that is, they go through and
then yelp for assistance, which means recalling the war fleet. That
should buy some time for Agamemnon."

     "Yeah, it just might," Rawlins said. He looked thoughtful. "If they
do that, maybe we can reinforce Balasingham in time to do some good."

     "Good thinking," Renner said.

     "What's Plan B, Commodore?"

     Renner said, "Our best guess is that the Khanate's Plan B is the
same as Medina's. If they can't blast past Agamemnon, then they come
back here, put together a big alliance that can defeat Medina, and offer
to negotiate with the Empire."

     "So the important thing is to see they don't get past Agamemnon.
Other than that-do we care who wins?" Rawlins asked.

     Kevin Renner had never thought of that at all.

     "The Empire may not care," Bury said. "But we do."

     Rawlins frowned.

     "I'll second that," Freddy Townsend said.

     Both men were civilians. Rawlins couldn't quite suppress a
patronizing tone. "Now, I know you like these Moties, but Imperial
policy is not to get involved with the internal affairs of candidate
systems."

"We all know it happens," Freddy said.

     "Maybe, but this is at a policy level a hell of a lot higher than
any of us," Rawlins said. "Even with the Blaine heirs aboard."

     "Rawlins-" Renner began.

     "Commander," Glenda Ruth said. "We're only speculating on what the
Khanate might do. The fact is, they haven't tried to negotiate with us.
They have taken two Empire citizens captive, and they won't even talk to
us about it.'

     "Hell, your friends took you captive."

     "And are doing their damnedest to make restitution," Freddy said.

     The two Mediators were listening intently, but neither spoke.

     "Medina has earned our trust," Bury said. "Should we not earn
theirs? Then there is a matter of property rights. Medina knew that-"

     "Property?" Rawlins demanded, his reply delayed by the lightspeed gap.

     "Yes, Commander. They knew that the protostar would collapse, that
the Sister would open. They bought that knowledge with scarce resources.
Including the life of an Engineer we allowed to die aboard MacArthur."

     "Be damned," Renner said.

     "Yes." Bury's voice sounded labored. "The situation is not quite
what happened to Mr. Townsend, but there are similarities. And from that
little store of knowledge they guessed what we would do, and they bet
their survival on being right. I have done the same myself. Do you not
regard ideas as property? In a sense, Medina Consortium holds copyright
on the Empire."

     A beat. Then, "Copyright. Thank you, Trader. Commodore?"

     Renner said, "We'll fight alongside Medina Trading. I'll take the
heat. You've got your orders, Commander. Go hit those colony ships.
We'll be thirteen hours behind you."

     "Yes, sir." Too late to be of any help, but they both knew that.
"You're an unknown to the Moties," Renner said. "They won't know what
your ship can do. I don't know if that means they'll concentrate on you
or try to avoid you. Be ready either way. We're going to need your
protection when we get closer, so try to stay alive."

     The delay was longer this time. "We'll try.'

     "Any more questions?...Right. Let's get to it. Godspeed." Renner
switched off, to find Bury chuckling.

     "Yeah?"

     "I was thinking," Bury said. "I can envision a trial. With Blaine's
parents presenting our defense."

 

 

     Sinbad was accelerating at 1.2 standard gravities. Glenda Ruth
Blaine was using the cramped space of the galley area to do slow
stretches. She asked, "Have you ever had a pet?"

"My dad had a pair of Keeshonden," Joyce said.

     "They died, though. You knew they'd die someday and did." Glenda
Ruth didn't wait for a response. "It was like with Jock and Charlie.
They told me themselves. Charlie died. My folks had a version of the C-L
worm by then, but it was late for Charlie, or it wasn't quite right. No,
Joyce, you leave camera where it is."

     Joyce hadn't moved. "I can't help what I'm thinking, Glenda Ruth,
but if they were about to shoot me for knowing too much, I'd still be
listening."

     "I'm not sure what I want to say for the press. What I did, it
wasn't honest and it wasn't simple and it would be insanely complicated
to try to describe. What I'm getting at is that the C-L worm pulled my
oldest friend off death row. Hello, Freddy."

     Freddy had popped out of the pilot's enclosure. "Hi. Being
interviewed?"

     "Off the record. Coffee?"

     "Bless you." Freddy Townsend turned to Bury. "Gravity all right, sir?"

     Bury looked up at him. "It is no worse than Sparta. I am quite
comfortable. Thank you. It is harder on Ali Baba and our friends." The
Mediator pup was huddled into Bury's armpit; it didn't seem unhappy.

     "I came back to show you something," Freddy said. "We've got
cameras outside the Field." He indicated the lounge screens. Bright
flashes and softer glows, the intricate light threads of a space battle

     "Atropos group?" Glenda Ruth asked.

     "They're still a couple of hours short of the Sister. That's the
Tartar fleet. They were closest. Victoria, I'm afraid it's not going
well for your people."

     "We did not expect it to," Victoria said.

     "A fearful consumption of resources," Omar said.

     "An investment," Bury said.

     "With potentially unlimited returns," Omar said. We have had years
to contemplate, but this is the first generation of Moties to see the
universe as a place of real opportunity. So. How soon will we be there?'

     "It's a bit under two light-minutes," Freddy said. "Call it
twenty-six hours at our present rate."

     "Won't it be all over by then?" Glenda Ruth asked.

"Possibly not," Victoria said. "Space battles take time."

     'And this is a battle such as few have ever seen," Omar said. "A
battle of Masters, the final failure of the Mediator class."

     "One thing I don't understand," Joyce said. "Why won't the Khanate
negotiate?"

     There were new flashes of light on the screens.

     "More ships," Glenda Ruth said, "Whose are those?"

     "Hard to tell," Freddy said. "But they're shooting at the Khanate,
so they're on our side."

     "Enemies of our enemies," Bury said. "We can but watch with
patience. Allah has been merciful."

"Joyce, there are many answers to your question," Victoria said. "Their
history. The Khanate has had few successes with alliances."

"Given their record this is not sucprising," Omar said.

     "All true. They treat their allies with contempt. They did not
honor the terms they had made with us. And now they see unlimited
potential if only one of their colony ships survives to roam Imperial
space."

     "Unlimited," Glenda Ruth said. "Crazy Eddie. An entire clan."

     "We see it, too," Victoria said. "As do Medina and East India. Call
it an entire culture."

 

     Sinbad's control bridge was dark except for the navigation screens.
Freddy had closed it off from the lounge. He had set the pilot's couch
for massage mode.

     Glenda Ruth noted Freddy's relaxed posture. "Hi."

     "Hello."

     "I saw some activity on the screens."

     Freddy nodded. "The battle's started up again. I told the
Commodore. There's not much we can do about it, for another fourteen
hours, so there wasn't any point in rousing the others."

     And you're not saying why you didn't call me. "What do we do when
we get there?"

     "Good question," Freddy said. "On this course we'll shoot past at
about two hundred klicks a second."

     "That's not much use."

     Freddy showed some irritation. "If we slow to match velocities,
we'll be forever getting there. The idea is that we can boost our thrust
at the end if somebody needs our firepower. Otherwise it's safer to go
through fast and backtrack."

     "Good news from all over," Glenda Ruth said.

     The main screen flared, a blue flash. She stared at it. "Freddy-"

     "It's all right. You don't have to watch."

     Her voice was almost patronizing, though it came three seconds
later. "Freddy love, there's not much point anyway. All I'm seeing is
colored lights. Why don't you tell me what's happening? Pretend it's a
race."

     "Race. Okay." A touch zoomed the picture, expanded the center of
the maze of colored lines. Lasers were splashing across black and
coal-red balloons of varied size. One was inflating, green, blue, a
white flash like a nova. "They began with twenty-six big ships. After
twelve hours of fighting it's twenty-three. They're not moving much, but
your brother would recognize that dance they're doing. Ship A floats
behind Ship B. Ship B takes the heat for a while. You can't do it unless
the enemy is all in one direction. Ship A sheds some energy, then drops
the Langston Field just as it passes from the other ship's shadow. Fires
everything. Turns on its Field again ... oops."

     "Doesn't always work?"

     "No. Twenty-two"

     Uh-huh. Freddy, that was twenty-six clans of the Khanate. Each ship
is an extended family. The ships are different sizes because some
families are bigger, or richer. It's worth remembering that Moties don't
flinch at extermination."

     Freddy looked at her

     "What are they doing now? Freddy, there goes another one!"

     "Caught you looking." He turned. "Where's the cloud?"

     "No, it just winked out. There, another one'

     "No, my love, that one's not dead." He slapped keys. "Commodore!
Mister Bury!"

     Bury's image appeared on the intercom screen. Two ships have fled
through the Sister. I think motion. There goes another one, yes, Freddy?"

     "Yes, and another one just died. Five down, three gone through, and
the rest are converging on the Sister."

     "0-okay. Atropos won't have to fight." Renner sounded tired, and
there was no image on the screen. "Freddy, we'll have to go through, but
that won't be for fourteen hours. You have the watch. I'd appreciate it
if you'd work the navigation problem. It lets the rest of us get some
sleep." There was a moment of silence. "Horace, we've got to talk to the
Moties. We can't go through the Jump alone."

     "So I had surmised. Go to sleep, Kevin. 1 will negotiate."

     Kevin Renner set his couch to full recline and closed his eyes. He
heard Bury's voice, brisk but with a thread of fatigue in it. "Omar, we
will need as many warships as can be assembled to accompany Atropos and
Sinbad through the Sister..." And then it all faded out.

 

 

     "Urgent message," the computer announced.

     Renner sat up at the console. "Put it through."

     Eudoxus showed on the screen. Renner punched in questions: Base Six
was a bit under four light-minutes behind him.

     "Kevin, the fleets of Byzantium are delayed. They will not reach
the Sister in time to accomplish anything, Shall we send them elsewhere?
Also, we have detected objects on an intercept course with Sinbad. Three
unidentified ships or. this vector." There was a twitter of binary data.
"They should be twenty-six minutes from intercept when you receive this."

     Renner thought it through, then sent, "I assume Byzantium is still
your ally. Ask them and any other allies to join you at Base Six. Help
to secure the Sister. We will look at your unidentified ships. Our
present plans are unchanged. We will follow the Atropos group through
the Sister. With luck you will secure the Sister from this side." Kevin
thought for a moment and shrugged. Why not? "Godspeed." Renner clicked
off. "Mr. Townsend?"

     Freddy Townsend's picture said, "What's up?'

     "Screen two." They studied the screen together. Black space and
stars, and three dots approaching from low and thirty degrees off the
port bow, a degree below the Pleiades.

     "Sinbad's detectors haven't seen them yet," Freddy said. "Maybe now
that we know where to look..."

     "Right." Renner punched in commands. "Three targets acquired.
Constant bearing, and closing, thirty thousand klicks. They're not
throwing anything at us yet, Freddy." He watched violet-white lights
weaving about him and said, "I'd say our allies are already alerted, but
call them anyway and make sure Rawlins knows, too."

     Wake anyone else up?'

     "Call Joyce." Bury was fast asleep. His readouts were a little
jagged, a bit disturbing. The Moties slept, too, and Kevin considered.
"We don't need a translator, do we?"

     "Let her sleep. Death makes Glenda Ruth twitchy"

     Joyce Trujillo was awake: Kevin could see her screen alight past
the back of her head. "Hi, Joyce. Battle shaping up. Freddy, have you
got any of the other ships?'

     "Signal from Ten, but I can't read it. Warriors. I'm waking Omar."

     "Swell."

     Omar uncurled and sat up. What followed was a rapid exchange
between Sinbud and its twenty small Motie Warrior fighter escorts. Omar
said, "You are to be protected."

     Irritating. Kevin said, "If I tell you that I am a Mediator-Warrior-"

"Ships Six through Twenty deployed between us and Bandit Cluster One.
Ships One through Five in reserve. Expected attack at high velocity, two
clusters of fighters around a fuel tank, expected to separate, plus a
Master ship. These are some random ally of the Khanate, arriving late
but obliged to protect the Sister from capture by East India and Medina."

     "Much better, Omar. Might they be aware that the Khanate has
abandoned them? Give me your best guess."

     "They will not guess that, because the Khanate need not have told
them what the Sister does. Ship One suggests you activate your Langston
Field now."

     Renner did that. Screens went black, then lit one by one as he
raised cameras.

     Violet lights were diminishing toward the Pleiades. "Omar, did all
of our escort go off to fight?"

     "Omar's off," Freddy said. "I see four Warrior fighters still with
us, not holding any special position. Dammit-" He didn't have to finish.
Glenda Ruth was watching Joyce's screen with bright

     Joyce spoke to her, a near-whisper in the dark cabin. Kevin wasn't
meant to hear. "Are we going to light, do you think?"

     "To fight, or to timidly hide behind our allies? Hmm." If Glenda
Ruth hadn't meant him to hear, Kevin didn't believe he would have.
"Joyce, we tried to put everything we know in the message to Weigle. We
even duped your tapes as a supplement."

     "'Even'?"

     "Barring that message, whether or not it went through, everything
mankind knows about Moties is right here in Sinbad."

     Three enemy dots had become a spray of lights. Sinbad's Warrior
fighters were dancing, an unpredictable pattern. The enemy began to
dance, too. When the enemy is light-seconds away, it is possible to
dodge laser beams.

     "The thing is," Glenda Ruth said, "if Sinbad has to fight, it'll be
a very bad sign."

     "It's likewise true that my holos may be the most important thing
to emerge from Mote system."

     "Point."

     "I've read about space-fleet engagements," Joyce said. "They all
say the same thing. They'd be boring if they weren't terrifying. I
didn't really believe that before."

     The weaving lights of the enemy ships had converged to one blurred
point and stayed that way. Renner frowned. What did they think they were
doing?

     They were withdrawing, the Warrior ships protecting the Master.
Sinbad's entourage were too many for them.

 

 

     Bandit Cluster Two was bigger. They went past at six hundred klicks
per, firing once. Cluster One's beams impinged on Sinbad at the same
time, the attack easily absorbed by Langston Fields. Cluster Two
decelerated to join One.

     Atropos reached the Sister and took up station there, without
incident, surrounded by East India Trading's Warriors and the remnants
of the Crimean Tartar war fleet. The Medina outriders were already arriving.

     A third Bandit Cluster arrived, too. With Cluster One/Two they
gathered their forces into a complex pattern half a million klicks out
and forward of the Sister, then held station.

     Freddy Townsend recorded that and later played it for Renner at
high speed. "Sir, it ought to make a pattern, but I can't see it."

     "Omar, who are these?"

     "Three families, one local, none of any consequence. The Khanate's
contract to depart Mote system must leave enough wealth behind to back
any number of alliances."

     "Okay. There aren't enough to attack us. They're expecting the
Khanate to come surging back through the Sister. Then when we flee,
these guys block our path."

     "What's in that direction?"

     "It doesn't matter. They're not between us and what we want. They
only think they are. Freddy, how close are we to the Sister?"

     "Three hours, but we'll be going through at two hundred klicks per,
unless we increase thrust. Another three hours if we miss the pass."

     Bury was asleep. His telltales seemed to have settled down: he was
resting well. Give him another hour, Renner thought. "Belay thrust
increase. Omar, we need a conference with our escorts and allies.
Freddy, please call Commander Rawlins."

 

     'Let me be sure of this," Rawlins said. "We're going through the
Sister. Me first, and I'm to try to protect the lot of you. What from?"

     "Whatever the Khanate has left as doorkeeper," Renner said.

"Opinion is divided on just how much that will be."

     "Okay," Rawlins said. "Standard convoy escort through a Jump point.
I can do that, but the Moties will have to cooperate. Shall we work out
the courses, or will you?"

     "Your job," Renner said. "I've been away from it awhile. You'll do
it better. Now, we're six hours behind you if Townsend's maneuver works,
thirteen if it doesn't. You'd better not wait. We'll follow you."

     "Yes, sir. Okay, I go in and cover the forty-seven Motie alliance
warships you're vectoring in. Then when we're all through, we make for
Agamemnon at flank speed."

     "Everything that gets through," Renner said. "You've got a copy of
my report to Agamemnon. Relay that if you can. The important thing is to
keep the Khanate from getting out to the Empire. Don't you agree?"

     "Yes. All right. Sir. Okay, but there are too many ships for me

to cover them all. I'll have to send some through in a dispersion
pattern. I'll work out the course vectors and send them over within an
hour. As for Sinbad, you're moving too fast, it would take hours to
match velocities."

     "We don't have hours. We're too slow anyway, with Mr. Bury aboard."

     "Exactly. We'll fight what we find there while you and your escorts
go right on past. They won't be expecting that."

     "That's the way I see it," Renner said.

     "Then we all go on. Commodore, I suggest you work on the message to
Balasingham. He isn't going to like seeing a bunch of Motie ships coming
at him."

     "Right. Thanks," Renner said. "Omar, make sure your people
understand. Commander Rawlins will have his computers work out a course
for every ship. It's important they follow directions exactly."

     "Understood," Omar said. "Thank you."

     "Okay, Commander, we'll wait for you to call. Thanks." Renner
turned to Freddy Townsend. "So. Still think we can get through at two
hundred klicks?"

     Piece of cake."

     "Just what is happening?" Joyce asked. "Freddy?"

     "Give me a minute," Freddy said.

     "Omar," Renner said. "When you can spare a moment, we have a job
for your Engineer." He tapped furiously and a series of diagrams
appeared on the screen. "I need this set up."

     "The Flinger, Kevin?"

     Bury. "Yeah." Renner glanced at Bury's medical readouts. They'd
settled to normal. "Glad you got a good rest. We're going through, and
we don't know what's on the other side. I want to erect the Flinger."

     "Indeed." Bury sighed. "In that case-Cynthia, I believe you should
open the sealed locker in Compartment Eight. We may need its contents."

     The brown Motie Engineer had been studying the screen. Now she
chattered to Omar.

     "Problem?" Renner asked.

     "No, she understands the mechanism and its purpose. It will be done
in less than an hour. Indeed, she says she can make considerable
improvements-"

     "No!" Bury said. "My ship, and by the Prophet, no! Leave it as it
was designed."

     Renner was chuckling, but stopped when he saw the medical readouts.
"Omar, I think it will be best if the system works as I expect it to. We
can leave the improvements for another time."

     "Very well." Omar spoke rapidly. The Engineer and Watchmakers went
aft to find their pressure suits

     "Please," Joyce said. "Won't somebody tell me what's happening?"

     "What's happening, or what we think is happening?" Glenda Ruth asked.

"Both!"

     "I would appreciate the information myself," Bury said.

     Kevin kept an ear cocked. Freddy, too, was listening, though he had
his own work.

     "Not for the record, my opinion only." The screens showed a chart
of the Mote system. Glenda Ruth said, "The Khanate sent its main war
fleet through the Sister while the Masters and their colony ships stayed
behind. East India and Medina made it too hot for them, and they fled
through as well. We figure they'll be headed for the Jump to New Cal,
but they'll have to find it first.

     "Meanwhile, our group is heading toward the Sister. There's another
squadron of alliance ships that can work it so they get there just ahead
of us. Atropos goes in with those. If there's nothing there to shoot at,
they'll head directly for Agamemnon at the exit point. We'll follow at
our own speed'

     "Oh," Joyce said. "Of course. We know where it is."

     "So we ought to get there first . . . Atropos and the Medina fleet,
that is. Rawlins goes directly there, so the Khanate won't know just how
strong we are."

     "But we're expecting trouble."

     "The Khanate is entirely likely to leave a sniper or six," Glenda
Ruth said.

     "But they know how many ships we have. Don't they?"

     "How could they possibly know what we'll take through? Anyway,
that's why Atropos goes first. He goes through and we follow, as many as
we can. Some snugged up behind Atropos, the rest in a crazy-quilt
pattern. The notion is that some get through. A lot get through."

"Oh."

     "Something else they won't expect," Freddy said. "Or rather they
will expect-"

     "Jump shock," Omar said. "They will have experienced it. Eudoxus
says it is formidable-but less so for you than us. They will not expect
you to recover as quickly as you will. Our Warrior officers agree. It is
a good plan."

 

     Atropos went second. First there was a fan of twenty East India
warships not much larger than Imperial corvettes traveling at high but
different speeds. Their mission was to distract whatever enemy waited on
the other side of Crazy Eddie's Sister.

     Freddy Townsend watched in appreciation. "Any regatta commodore
would be proud of that performance."

     "Or fleet admiral for that matter," Renner said. "All right, there
goes Atropos." Alliance warships huddled close behind the Imperial
cruiser, in what would have been called "line ahead" in wet navy days.
Now they vanished one by one as Sinbad hurtled toward the Jump point.

 

     Sinbud's Warrior entourage would have been visible if the Field
were not up. They were needed for more than protection. Freddy Townsend
was using them for triangulation.

     The Sister was thirty seconds away.

     "If we make this, it'll be a record," Freddy said. "Will I be
allowed to file it?"

     Kevin said, "Not my decision. And if we miss, we can try again, of
course, but that's three hours down the recycler, Freddy, and I don't
know how important three hours is. Give it your best."

     "Always."

     Victoria and Omar concurred: any decent Warrior pilot could do
this. With twenty Warrior pilots to triangulate, even a human pilot had
a chance.

     Kevin never saw Freddy hit the switch.

 

 

 

7 Jump Shock

 

 

Among other evils which being unarmed brings you, it causes you to be
despised.

-Niccolo Machiavelli

 

 

In the two days before the Khanate ships found them, Jennifer had little
to do but watch Terry, and talk to Pollyanna, and pray. The God of
mankind was God of the Mote, too. She prayed for solutions that would
bring peace to both kinds of mind.

     When the Khanate ships approached, Jennifer looped Freddy's stored
data on the Contraceptive-Longevity Worm. The Khanate Warriors found it
running when they burst through the wall.

     For a time they ignored it. Two Engineers, four Watchmakers, and a
Warrior searched once for booby traps, then in leisurely fashion for
anything of interest. A Mediator and a Master arrived, discussed,
examined. Cerberus's cabin was again infested with Moties.

     The Mediator listened to the recording Victoria had made, the
notice in trade Koine that the ship was salvage but that Medina Alliance
would pay well for Jennifer and Terry. The Mediator turned to the Master
and spoke. The Master spoke curtly. Both ignored the humans.

     The Warrior went away. The Mediator examined Pollyanna without
waking her, then took position in front of a monitor recently worked
over by an Engineer. Watchmakers scurried about like big, helpful,
curious spiders.

     Over the next several hours Cerberus changed again. A pity Freddy
couldn't see this. The Khanate found his drive, Hecate's drive, pushing
too light a load. They added a truss to hold cargo, fiddled with the
drive to get yet more thrust, added nets of spheroids, as if Cerberus
had sprouted clusters of tremendous grapes. More cargo . .. and
weaponry? Jennifer couldn't tell. Terry would have known, but Terry
wasn't talking.

     Terry dozed most of the time. Something would get his attention:
Jennifer caressing his neck or ear, or a Watchmaker running across his
back. His eyes would open; maybe he would smile, maybe he would drink
some water or broth, speak a few words, and presently go back to sleep.
He wasn't keeping good track of events. Jennifer had to keep her own
counsel.

     Help would come. Jennifer waited.

     Inside, the Moties were at work. This time there was no stopping
them. Their interest was in the screens, cameras, computers,
communications. They didn't touch the air system. Perhaps the Tartar
Engineers had sufficiently altered that.

     Pollyanna woke. She and the Khanate Mediator chattered as they
watched the monitor

     The Master came back with a Doctor and another Engineer. Pallyanna
jumped to her at once and began to nurse.

     The Khanate's Doctor was distinctly different from Dr. Doolittle,
smaller, frail seeming. She did little to disturb Terry, though she
examined Jennifer in detail.

     Pollyanna, well fed now, returned to Jennifer's shoulder and stayed
there while she chatted with the Khanate Mediator. Her toes clutched
Jennifer's shoulder now, while her arms waved in flamboyant gestures.
The adult's answers were more concise, a flip of the wrist, right elbows
rapping each other: how the hell would a human copy that? Jennifer tried
to concentrate. An infant Mediator was teaching a mature one to speak
Anglic! The recording would be fantastically valuable, but it would miss
things, nuances...that head-and-shoulder tilt, 'not quite".

     Terry stirred, and Jennifer looked into his eyes. Was sense
returning to him?

     And everything went blurry

 

     Jennifer recovered slowly. It struck her that if she were Terry
Kakumi, and uninjured, she could take the ship from these wailing,
kicking Moties. But lack of sleep had done Jennifer in, and the Moties
were already gathering themselves. She moved hand over hand to the
telescope controls.

     Cerberus had jumped, of course. The Frankenstein's monster of a
spacecraft was nearly the first through to MGC-R-31. Ships were pouring
through aft, accelerating, sweeping past Cerberus and leaving it behind,
a crippled hybrid. Cerberus limped behind the Warrior fleet at about one
Mote gravity. The drive flames of a thousand small ships retreated ahead.

     And the Mediator spoke to Jennifer for the first time. "You are
Jennifer Banda? Call me Harlequin. I serve the Master Falkenberg." She
must have seen Jennifer's reaction-Oh, really?-but she did not try to
temper the arrogance of her claim. "We must discuss your future."

     "Surely yours, too," Jennifer said.

     "Yes. You are ours now. If all goes best, we break free from the
Empire to seek our own stars. You and Terry Kakumi with us. When finally
we must confront the Empire, you or your children must speak for us."

     It was hardly the future Jennifer would have chosen. But the
Mediator was speaking: "Barriers wait before us. Where will the next
bridging point lead us? What stands to block us?"

     "The Empire of Man," Jennifer said. Terry smiled, barely, and she
saw bright glints: his eyes were open.

     "Detail," the Mediator said. "We find one tremendous ship and
several much smaller."

     "There'll be more. We got the jump on you. More ships will be
coming through from New Cal, any hour. You don't know what you're
facing. This is the Empire."

 

     When Jennifer Banda was six years old, the Navy had declassified
certain bob recordings. The whole school assembled to watch them.

     That was twelve years after the Empire fleet had assembled off New
Washington before the final Jump to New Chicago, a world that had
seceded from the Empire and renamed itself Freedom. That world had been
restored to the Empire, its name restored, too. There had been battles,
but what Jennifer remembered was the massed might of the Empire of Man,
ships the size of islands passing at meteor speeds and higher.

     No Motie Mediator could see all that in her eyes. Still, Harlequin
would see nothing to deny what Jennifer believed: that the power that
held a thousand worlds in its gripping hand was coming down the
Khanate's throat.

     Harlequin said, "If we could reach the new bridging point in time-"

     "You'd find our battleships just the other side. You felt the Jump
shock. And they'll be waiting."

     "I will show you what we plan."

     Warrior and Engineer and Mediator huddled, and Pollyanna with them.
On Cerberus's screens the gory details of an Engineer's autopsy were
replaced with . . . something astronomical. The colors were poor, but
this was MGC-R-31, there the little red star, there the blue sparks of
Warriors retreating well ahead of Cerberus, there a lozenge next to
concentric circles: undoubtedly Agamemnon and the Jump to New Cal. And
there, popping out of the other target area aft: more ships, bigger.

     "The Masters come before it was intended," Harlequin said. "Never
mind. What waits beyond"-she indicated the outward target-"this?"

     "Classified," Terry said.

     "Oh, good! Terry, how are you feeling?"

     "I might live. Won't like it at first. Thanks for staying."

     "Oh, no! How could I leave you?"

     "Don't tell them details. Sleep now," Terry said, and closed his eyes.

     Jennifer nodded. She'd expected him to speak earlier.

     Harlequin said, "What system lies beyond the bridge? There must be
other bridges."

     "I'm going to stop talking now," Jennifer said.

     "Not a problem." Harlequin pointed at the cluster of large ships
aft. "I will tell you. Twenty Master ships have come through. Our
Warriors will prepare the way through to the Empire. There must be
bridges to other stars. We seek the one that departs the Empire. So do
you, Jennifer, for my life and yours, and to save the lives of any in
our path."

     'You shouldn't be running from the Crazy Eddie Worm," Jennifer
said. "You can surrender. Don't you understand, you don't have to die!"

     The Warrior made a sound, and Harlequin turned. On the screen other
ships were popping through behind the Khanate Masters.

 

 

 

     Something big was crawling across Renner's chest. A monkey or a big
spider, injured, missing limbs. "Ali Baba is sick," it said. "His
Excellency is sick. So is, am I. Sick in the head, concussion, scrambled
brains and wobbly eyes. Kevin?"

     "It'll be all right." Renner hugged the little Mediator. Craning
his head around made him dizzy and sicker. "Just wait, it'll get better."

     Bury was on his back, toes pointing slightly apart, hands apart and
palms upward, Yoga corpse position: he was calming himself the only way
he knew how.

     The screens were blurred. A voice was shouting from the background,
shouting for the Captain. I'm too damned old for this.

     Renner popped his restraint belts. "Townsend?" His balance was
still screwy. He pulled himself around to where he could see Bury's
monitors. The medic array had turned itself off at the Jump. Now it was
running a self-test loop. But here came Cynthia, moving quickly on hands
and knees. She crouched above Bury and began a medical inspection,
pulse, tongue, eyes...

"Townsend!"

     "Here."

     "What's-" Renner couldn't say it properly.

     "Atropos on line. We can receive."

     But no transmissions yet. Renner slapped at the keys. The screens
were still dark, but a voice was saying, "Sinbad this is Atropos. Sinbad
this is Atropos. Over."

Renner stretched experimentally. Integral e to the x dx is e to the x .
. . He'd found that the computers recovered quicker than he did. Should
be safe enough to test now. He woke the communications computers. A
snarl of static.

"Atropos, this is Sinbad."

     "Sinbad, stand by."

     Rawlins here."

     Status report?" Kevin croaked.

     "Critical. We're under attack by half a dozen ships. One of them's
a big mother. Sir."

     Green lights showed on one corner of Renner's control board.
"Freddy! She's waking up, see if you can see anything."

     "Right."

     "We're recovering," Renner said. "How bad is it?"

     Rawlins: "We're peaking in green. I won't last forever, and I can't
shoot back. No chance to send a message to Agamemnon."

     Renner shook his head. Critical. Can't shoot back. Why can't he
shoot back? Energy. Energy control. More green lights on his console.

     Bury's machinery started suddenly: displays hunting, then drips to
adjust his chemical balance.

     The Mediators were thrashing feebly.

     A screen came to light. Then another.

     "Rawlins," Renner said. His voice was still thick. "Hang in there.
We're going past."

     "Here's a battle picture. I'll relay as long as I can."

     The enemy fleet was a scattering of black dots across MGC-R31's
orange-white glare, visibly receding with Sinbad's velocity. They'd
positioned themselves well, Renner thought. Just sunward of the Sister,
to foul an intruder's sensors; near enough to blast them at point-blank.

     Atropos was glowing far brighter than the little sun. Nothing
smaller than Atropos would have survived this long, without Atropos
itself as shield. Too few Medina ships were adrift behind Atropos,
firing around the shield, easing back. When Atropos went, they'd go, too.

     It was going to be tricky. The Moties aboard were no use at all.
Sinbad's computers were Navy quality, three independent systems, each
working the same test problems until they all got the same answers-and
they weren't getting them.

     "Townsend!"

     "Sir?"

     "Get the Flinger going! Hit that Motie fleet. Especially the big ship."

     "Will do. Launcher self-check. In order. Erecting." The Field
blinked for a second as the loops of the linear accelerator eased up
through the black energy shell. "Launcher outside Field. I'm getting
direct camera information. Trajectory analysis-"

     Sinbad was flashing past the battle. They had almost no time.

"Trajectory computers give divergent answers!" Freddy shouted. "Rape it.
Launching. Stand by!"

     Sinbad recoiled. Then again. "On the way. Automatic loaders are
working," Freddy said.

     A muted keening sound had to be coming from Glenda Ruth.

     "Stand by," Freddy said. "On the way. Dispersion pattern.
Continuous fire, stand by!"

     There was a floodlight glare from every screen, then all screens
went dark. "They hit us. That's it for the cameras," Freddy said.
"Captain, the Flinger's dry. We'd have to bring it in to reload."

     "Never mind."

     Bury was trying to crawl up Kevin's ankle with just one hand.
"Bring it in. Kevin, bring it in!"

     "Okay, I'm doing it. Lie still, Horace." Unseen, the loops of the
Flinger were sinking through the Field into the hull.

     "Superconductor," Bury said.

     "Ah." Sinbad's finger was a linear accelerator made with Motie
superconductor. That was why it hadn't melted in the glare of Khanate
lasers. If it wasn't withdrawn, it would conduct the energy of the laser
attack into Sinbad.

     "We're still getting relays from Atropos," Renner said. The relays
would be progressively out of date as Sinbad moved away from the battle.
"And I've got a camera on-line."

     Someone, human or Motie, made a strangling sound. Glenda Ruth
wailed again. The black beyond the windows began to glow dull red.

     An image formed on Renner's screen, a composite of the relay and
direct observation. It showed a cluster of Motie ships receding as
Sinbad moved past the battle. Beams reached from three smaller Motie
ships toward Sinbad. Six others held Atropos pinned like a bug. One of
the Motie ships attacking the Imperial cruiser was nearly as large as
Atropos.

     "Blue field," Renner muttered. Give him another five minutes. Then
he's gone and so are we.

     "Five. Four," Freddy counted. "Three. Two. One. Zero. Maybe the
timer's off. Or the trig-"

     Something flashed intolerably bright beyond the larger Motie ship.
The larger Motie ship went from green to bright blue, expanding. Another
flash. Another. The blue shaded toward violet.

     "Jesus, Horace," Renner muttered. "Fifty megatons? More? How long
have we had those aboard?"

     "You would not..." Bury's voice was weak but held a note of ironic
triumph. "You would not have approved. At what those cost I nearly did
not approve myself."

     "It's working!" Joyce shouted. "They're not attacking Atropos
anymore. They're-"

     She fell silent. Two of the Motie ships flashed violet and beyond
and were gone. The largest ship was now glowing blue-white, and Atropos
was firing at it. "He can't last," Joyce said.

     The big Motie ship flashed and vanished. Now a score of bright dots
clustered around the fading glow that was Atropos and accelerated toward
the remaining Tartar ships.

     "Sinbud, this is Atropos."

     "Go ahead, Commander."

     "Well done, sir. We've won this battle," Rawlins said. "The Moties
can clean up the rest of their blockade fleet. Sir, there was no
opportunity to contact Aganiemnon. I suggest you do that."

     'Right. Carry on, Rawlins. Townsend!"

     "Here."

     "Find Agamemnon. Send that message."

     "On it."

 

 

     "You fight like vermin," Harlequin said with contempt.

     Jennifer flinched at the insult, then wondered at its meaning. But
the Mediator had kicked himself aft without giving her a chance to
reply. Now the Moties huddled, chattering, and Jennifer turned back to
the display.

     There had been a battle. Ships had died. It looked as if the
intruders had won.

     Harlequin was back, with the Warrior hovering behind her. "I
apologize," the Motie said. "I understand now. You throw away resources
like vermin, but it is not that you are animals. You have endless
resources."

     "If you win everything you want, your descendants will think the
same way," Jennifer said.

     "Yes. Our battle plan has changed, Jennifer, We no longer believe
we can pass to New Cal."

     "Surrender," Jennifer said. "Accept the Crazy Eddie Worm. No Motie
need die because there are too many."

     A wave dismissed the notion. "We have considered this. There are
domains to be fought for, and we may yet win."

     And Mediators speak for the Masters. "You can't win. The Empire
has-you've seen the resources we have. This hasty little expedition. A
civilian ship was enough to harm your war fleet and alter your plans,
and you haven't seen what the Empire can do! Harlequin, talk to your
Masters!"

     "I have done so. You have none of your altered parasite. There is
no time to test it, and your altered parasite might well be fiction."
Harlequin might not even have seen her reaction. "In any case, our
options are not ended. Your representatives have made agreements with
our rivals. Medina Consortium, Pollyanna calls them. Very well, we need
only conquer Medina and take their place. Then we will have a gripping
hand on the vast resources offered by your Empire."

     This at first seemed ludicrous to Jennifer. "All Moties look alike?"

     "We must assume that you passed messages describing your situation,
describing promises made to Medina Consortium, describing battle plans.
But if we silence every human voice, and if we make our rivals extinct,
who will tell your Masters which of us was Medina Consortium?"

     Jennifer sensed that her answer would be taken very seriously; so,
very seriously, she thought it through.

     "What if you fail? One voice could destroy you all."

     "Humans are conspicuous. They require their special life support
systems. We will find you."

     "What are you going to do?"

     "It is done. Our Warriors will follow your human-built ships and
destroy them. Others may remain on Medina's major carrier, but my
Warrior adviser calls it a mere hydrogen snowball, conspicuous and slow,
easy to capture."

     She's crazy! But all Moties look different. It's no better than
looking all alike. It could work, Jennifer thought. And Harlequin knows
I believe it might work. Damn. "What of us?"

     "We may have need of you."

     "Of course." If the Khanate failed, she or Terry would convey
surrender terms to the Empire. So, they would be the last to die. I have
to think. There must be some way to convince them that this is madness.
"Crazy Eddie."

Harlequin had not mastered the art of appearing to shrug, but her
inflection conveyed the same sentiment. "As you say. These are Crazy
Eddie times. But time is short, and if we seek this option, we must seek
it now. We will speak later."

 

 

Freddy Townsend said, "Sir, I have some other ships in view. "Interested?"

"No. Find Agamemnon."

"Waiting."

     "Making coffee," Joyce said. "Strong, with hot milk?" Freddy said,
"If Agamemnon has shields up, I won't find it, period. What if we just
beam your message at the Jump point?"

     "Good, Freddy. Do that. Then keep trying."

     "Aye, aye."

     Lights dimmed. All of Sinbad's power was going into that one blip.

     "Oh, Lord," Freddy said.

     "Talk to me, Townsend."

     "More ships under acceleration. Fusion drives, high acceleration. I
count sixteen no more than five million klicks away, all with a redshift
and no drift, and I don't know where they're aimed but it isn't at the
Jump to New Cal."

     Renner brought the images in closer.

     "Kevin, what is it?" Joyce demanded.

     "Not enough data."

     "There's more," Freddy said. "A whole sparkling field of drive
lights at maybe sixty million klicks, all of 'em between us and Agamemnon."

     "They've cut us off," Joyce said.

     "That they did," Freddy said. "Skipper, I've got four minutes
integration on them now. They're showing a decreasing redshift and no
drift."

     "Thrust?"

     "Close enough to three standard gee."

     "Bound to be Warriors."

     "All redshifted?" Joyce asked. "That means they're going away from us."

     "Decreasing redshift," Freddy said. "Going away, but they're
thrusting toward us. An airplane would be turning around, but you can't
do that in vacuum."

     Renner touched the intercom buttons. "Omar, have you been following
this?"

     "Yes, Commodore."

     The Motie's voice conveyed weariness, confusion, and determination
at the same time. Never off duty, Renner thought. "Watch. That group I
just marked. That's the main body of the Khanate fleet. Best estimate is
that their Warriors were going all out toward Agamemnon and the Jump
point to New Cal until the Masters popped through."

     "That is reasonable."

     Okay. But now the Masters are all moving away from the Sister, and
the Warriors are slowing, probably coming back. What arethey likely to
think they're doing?"

     "The Warriors are swarming back to defend the Masters from us. The
Masters have many options. Their target may be a place of hiding,
perhaps the comets around the brown dwarf star. They seem to have given
up the Jump point out of the system. Something has convinced them that
your defense at the Jump is too formidable."

     "Jennifer," Freddy said. "She must have convinced them."

     "Those bombs did not weaken her arguments," Omar said."Whatever
else you have done, you have shown that you are willing to expend
resources."

     "Resources to burn," Joyce said. "Which we quite literally-"

     All the screens whited out. Kevin moved two dial displays, in
haste. The screens dimmed to a scattering of laser-green points. Sinbad
was under attack.

     "Whatever. Now what's happening?" Renner mused. "Omar, that Warrior
fleet is aimed right at us. Or at the gate back to the Mote system.
Which is it?"

     "Why not both?"

     "Both."

     Omar and Victoria conferred briefly. Then Omar said, "If we
threaten the Khanate Masters, they will attack us, of course. But
consider this. If they have abandoned the notion of forcing their way
past Agamemnon, then the Khanate may have instructed their Warriors to
return through the Sister to prepare a path of safety for their return
to Mote system."

     "They're giving up?" It was the first time Glenda Ruth had spoken
since the battle.

     "Perhaps." Omar shrugged. "Or they may attack Medina, to soften our
power for later negotiation. Or something else. This is a matter for
military strategy."

     Victoria said, "They'll kill or capture the humans if they can. If
your Empire has only the Khanate to negotiate with, any contract would
favor the Khanate."

     "Bet?"

     Victoria answered in Motie. Glenda Ruth laughed as their speech
became faster and faster. She said, "Uncle Kevin, they're betting!
Descendants for their Masters! Victoria's giving four to one-"

     "Later, Glenda Ruth. Omar, it looks like their whole fleet of

Warriors is coming straight at us."

     The cabin went dark. "I've found Agamemnon," Freddy reported. "I'm
beaming your message again."

     "Good. Very good. Now we've got to get out of here. Suggestions?"

     No one answered. "Freddy, turn us around. Get us on course to go
back through the"-hell-"through the Sister."

     "Through the Sister. What thrust?"

     Renner let the computer work for a moment. "That's a god-awful
amount of radiation they're aiming at us. If it keeps up, we'll have to
duck. What are they trying to do?"

     "Kill us?" Freddy suggested.

     "Well, if they can, but what else?" Renner studied the screens. If
the Motie fleet continued on course, it would get to the Sister in about
twenty-five hours. Another moment of indecision. Then, "Keep it
reasonable. Say point three for now." The Field was dull red. Not bad,
but they'd be bathed in that green laser glare for hours to come. "I
want to see what those Warriors will do."

     "What of our ships?" Omar asked.

     "I'll keep Atropos," Renner said. "Have all your Motie ships
reinforce Balasingham. Look, he's going to be a bit wary of them."

     "We have discussed this," Omar said. "Our ships will position
themselves to aid your warship without threatening it."

     Horace Bury's voice trembled with exhaustion, but there was
triumph, too. "Mercy of Allah! Kevin, we have sent our message to the
Empire, and the Khanate has turned back. We have fulfilled our mission,
whatever happens. Now we survive if Allah wills it.''

     "We may have fulfilled the mission," Kevin said. "It all depends on
that Khanate Warrior fleet. We don't know what they're going to do, and
as long as they're in this system, they're dangerous. They could still
batter their way past Balasingham." Renner studied the screen again.
"Well, as long as they're chasing us, they're not doing that. If they're
back in Mote system, they're for sure not doing that. Maybe we can lead
them there."

     "Good," Bury said.

     Kevin thought, Can you take another Jump? and didn't speak. What if
he said no? "I'll tell Rawlins."

 

     "My viewers may not understand," Joyce said. "I'm not sure I
understand. First we come through to the red dwarf system. Then we
fight. We win. Now for the past four hours we've been slowing down, and
we're headed back the way we came." She looked at her screens, noted the
yellow glow of the Field. Sinbad was under continuous attack.

     "It's all part of the same battle," Freddy Townsend said.

     "The important thing is that the Khanate fleet is moving toward the
Sister, not going after Agumemnon," Glenda Ruth said. "We have to keep
them heading toward us."

     "But are they after us, or would they go back to the Mote anyway?"

     "It doesn't matter, Joyce," Victoria said. "Anything that gets them
back into the Mote system."

     "So we're bait," Joyce said. "I guess that wouldn't be so bad-but
to be bait when you don't even know it's you they're after!"

     "They're after us," Freddy said.

     "How can you be sure?" Joyce demanded.

     "If they're not, they're sure wasting a lot of energy," Freddy
said. 'They can't spare the fuel. I think it's this way. If they can
kill us, they won't go through, but if we run through, they'll follow
us. Glenda Ruth?"

"Best bet," Glenda Ruth said.

Joyce said, "And there you have it."

 

     "Situation unchanged, Commodore," Rawlins said. "They haven't tried
to intercept the allied ships we sent to reinforce Balasingham. It's us
they care about, all right, and there's too many to fight. Our only
chance is to run. I suggest we increase acceleration. The less of this
fire we take, the better chance we'll have once we're through."

     "Agreed. Take it up to one point five gee."

     "One point five, aye, aye." Rawlins's image turned away for a moment.

     "Once we're stabilized in the Mote system, thrust along this
vector," Renner said. There was a twitter of data. "And I had the Moties
record some orders. You'll recover before we do. Send these messages to
Base Six as soon as you can."

     "Messages to Base Six. Aye, aye."

     "Keep the comm link," Renner said. He sighed and touched the
intercom buttons. "Stand by for increased gravity. One point five g." He
touched another button. "Horace-"

     "I will survive."

     "Yeah. If they keep that beam on us too long-"

     "Kevin, you will do what you must do."

 

     Renner had been at work. Sailing Master aboard MacArthur, Bury's
pilot for thirty years: this he could have done in his sleep. "Horace,
can you take one point seven gee for eleven minutes?"

     "Yes, of course, Kevin."

     Of course. The danger to Bury wasn't from another increase in
thrust, but from Jump shock. "Townsend, do it."

     Ali Baba's eight kilograms hit him in the chest. The pup cried,
"No, Kevin! Not again!"

"Here, Ali Baba," Bury said, and the Mediator went, fearfully. Freddy
said, "Aye, aye. Done. Any margin of error there?"

"We'll be violet when we go through the Eye." Freddy shuddered.

The Engineers were up and crawling; the Mediators watched. Kevin bit
back his questions and presently understood. The Moties had Cynthia's
couch disassembled and were putting it back together next to Bury's
water bed. That crowded Glenda Ruth, so they had to move her couch
before they could return to their couches and collapse.

     "Commodore? I've got the Master ships' target. It's the brown
dwarf. Maybe they expect to take cover in the ring."

     "Once they kill us."

     Cynthia had finished her exercise set in the kitchen space. The
view through the window was a uniform cheerful green.

 

 

 

     On the enlarged screen that the Watchmakers had finished erecting,
one blazing point reached the Sister and disappeared without exploding.
Then the second. Jennifer heaved a great sigh of relief. "They're
through," she said.

     Terry squeezed her foot. She reached around to pat his cheek. "How
are you doing?"

     "Healing. You?"

     Just waiting. Harlequin's up front getting battle data. Should I
really stop talking, or try to talk them into something?"

     "Talk. They'll read you anyway."

     But it was over an hour before Harlequin rejoined them. "The Sister
hides your ships for the moment," he said. "We did not expect they could
survive our barrage."

     "That's another thing about resources," Jennifer said. "Our ships
are bigger, better defended, more powerful."

     Harlequin laughed in great amusement and some scorn: Freddy's
laugh. Harlequin must have had it from Pollyanna. "Another thing about
our breeding problem: our ships are more numerous by far! Jennifer, our
intentions are not your concern. We will discuss strategy. These two ships-"

     "I must stop listening-"

     But the Mediator's big left palm was out, pause a minute, while the
Warrior spoke.

     They finished. Harlequin said, "Jennifer, we sent most of our
Warriors to chase your two Empire ships down, under the command of our
junior Master. Medina's lizard-raping Warriors managed to destroy that
command ship as they passed, but our Warrior ships are nearly untouched.
They will follow your Empire-built ships through the Sister to Mote
system. They can't hide, Jennifer, their drives are too peculiar."

     In fact, the blue sparks of the Warrior ships' drives were
disappearing even as Harlequin spoke. Other, larger sparks had flown
past: the Khanate Master ships were on their way to Bury's Star. "Where
will your Masters hide?"

     "In the rocks. Does it matter? We've given up hope of bursting
through the other bridging point into your Empire. We must wait until
our Warriors report success at the Mote."

     "You intend to kill us all?"

     "Yes. Your ships will have the advantage in the first instants
because they will go through first and recover first from the shock.
Unless humans tolerate the shock worse than we do?"

     Jennifer laughed.

     Harlequin frowned. "No? We watched you. You recovered very slowly."

     "Harlequin, I'm half-dead of fatigue. Poor Terry's half-dead,
period." An instant later she could have bitten her tongue off. Too
late: Harlequin was leaping aft.

     Terry's hand closed on the Motie's ankle and yanked him backward.
Jennifer shrieked, "Kill him! Kill him, Terry!"

     The Warrior was arrowing toward them.

     Terry's arms closed around the Motie's head and shoulders. He
twisted. "Dammit!" he muttered, and set himself and twisted much harder.
The lopsided head turned with a pop like a branch breaking, and then the
Warrior was wrapped around Terry like strangler vine, with his gun in
Terry's ear.

     Terry let go. Harlequin floated loose, still screaming thinly.

     Under the Warrior's gun, they watched the Doctor pull and twist the
Motie's head back into place. Harlequin's screaming died to a moan.

     "No good," Terry said. "I forgot. No vertebrae, just that kind of
handle that connects the skull to the shoulders. I only dislocated it,
and the spinal cord isn't even in it, it's underneath. He'll talk."

     Jump shock. It hurts them much worse than it hurts us. They didn't
know it."

     "Yeah. But that was the last Warrior ship going through. I'm right,
aren't I, Jennie?"

     Jenny looked. "Yeah. Those other lights are all big Master ships,
and they're all past the Sister."

     "Hah. Slowed Harlequin down just enough. Now their whole Warrior
fleet is in Mote system chasing down Sinbad and Atropos, and no Master
to tell them different. Isn't that interesting? I wonder what a Navy man
can do with that."

     "We may not live to see it."

     "Jenny, that took everything I had. If they decide to shoot me,
don't bother to wake me." Terry's eyes closed.

 

 

8 Stern Chase

 

 

Retreat, hell! We're just attacking in the opposite direction!

 

-US. Marine Corps commander, Changjin Reservoir, Korea

 

 

I'm just too damned old for this. Renner gradually became aware...

Cynthia was swearing in a loose-lipped mumble. Her body covered Bury's,
obscenely, kissing . . . breath for him, squeeze his rib cage closed,
blow into his mouth, squeeze...

     Freddy said, "Atropos calling."

     "Put'm through... Hello, Rawlins."

     Commodore, you're a flawless diamond on black velvet, Brilliant
blue-white."

     Flattering. Ss'a quote-" From a historical novel, The Taking of
Serpons Peak, just before the ship exploded. "Any threats here?"

     "We're clear. Bandit Group One-Two-Three pulled well back from the
Medina ships. East India is still holding the Crazy Eddie point for us,
but not with enough ship to defeat what's coming here. Byzantium hasn't
got here yet. Nobody's shooting at us. What's our move?"

     Reimer's eyes were properly focusing now.

     "General order: Make for the Crazy Eddie point. Keep station with
Sinbad. Are we in communication with the Motie fleet?"

     "Yes. I'll relay."

     Bury was trying to sit up. Cynthia braced him.

     Renner didn't recognize the Motie on-screen. A young Mediator,
presumably male. "Commander Rawlins has informed us that a large Khanate
war fleet, too large for our power, will arrive here through the Sister
within the hour," the Motie said. "I am ready to convey your
instructions to our Master."

     "Avoid combat with the main fleet," Renner said. "Preserve your
power, but we want you to take out any command ship that comes through.
We expect the main Khanate fleet to chase us. As long as it does, leave
it alone, but we don't want that fleet to get new instructions.

     "Same for the Jump point. Make it expensive to go back through the
Sister. Their main war fleet can do anything it wants to, and you can't
stop them, but you can stop them reporting back to the Masters on the
other side with anything short of a real battle group. Do that, please."

     "Instruction received. Stand by for acknowledgment."

     What else? "Townsend, get us moving toward the Crazy Eddie point.
Cynthia, how much can he stand?"

     "Pulse is strong."

     "Anything," Bury said. "Kevin, do what you must. It is now in the
hands of Allah."

     "Yeah." And I think I'm too old for this. "Run up to one gee,
Townsend. There's a stunt I want to try."

     The communications screen lit again. "Your instructions will be
obeyed," the Mediator said. "We will do what we can." "Thank you.
Rawlins, you stay with us."

     "I can boost harder than you can."

     "I thought of that, but no. I need you with us."

     "You're assuming they're sending their whole fleet."

"I sure hope so," Renner said. "The warships anyway." His last
observation in the red dwarf system was of the Master ships making for
Bury's Star at low thrust. It didn't look as if they'd be coming back to
the Mote system soon. And as long as the Warriors were chasing Sinbad-
"We're bait," he said to no one in particular.

     After Rawlins rang off, Renner looked around his ship. Horace was
breathing by himself, eyes open, jaw slack, full of funny chemicals.
Borloi extract, no doubt: no prohibition in the Koran against borloi. It
was amazing that he could talk at all.

     Freddy had recovered from Jump shock with stunning speed. Renner
resented that. Glenda Ruth Blaine still looked as if she'd been
blackjacked. The Moties were worse off, still keening in pain and angst.
That couldn't last. Renner needed them.

 

     The Empire ships fell toward the Crazy Eddie point at zero gee,
following forty-five minutes of thrust. Renner couldn't tell them how
long that would last. Cynthia was leading Horace Bury through a program
of stretches. Joyce was preparing a sketch lunch. Nobody had ever asked
if the reporter could cook. She could.

     Telescopes aboard Atropos, then aboard Sinbad, observed small hot
ships emerging through an invisible hole at high velocity and high
acceleration. They dimmed, reducing thrust while they sought their
targets. Presently they flared and moved at low acceleration toward the
position of Bandits One-Two-Three.

     "It worked."

     "Why are you whispering? Call Atropos."

     Freddy cleared his throat. "Yessir."

     "They can't have taken time to refuel," Renner told Rawlins.
"They're burning fuel they can't spare. Which means we can beat them to
the Crazy Eddie point at anything above one point one gee."

     If they chase us."

     "Yeah. Assume they will."

     "Then their best bet is to take it easy," Rawlins said. A stern
chase is a long chase. Easy to use all your fuel in the chase and have
none for the battle, Of course, they won't know where you're headed."
Pause. "Or if they do figure it out, they won't know why."

     "Okay. All we have to do is make sure they don't cripple us. I want
to beat them to the Crazy Eddie point, but not by much, and I want to
make sure we have plenty of maneuvering fuel when they catch up to us.
Meanwhile, maintain your watch. You, too, Freddy. I want to know
instantly if large ships with cooler exhaust and lower acceleration come
through."

     "Aye, aye, sir." Rawl ins signed off.

     At least he didn't ask if I know what I'm doing.

     An hour later Freddy saw the Khanate Warriors turning. "They've
found us," he said. "Somehow."

     Renner grinned widely. "They've found us and they're chasing us.
Stand by for acceleration. Horace, how does one standard gee sound?
We'll take it up slowly."

     "Heavenly," Bury said.

     "Stand by." Weight returned slowly.

     "There," Freddy said. "You can unstrap now. It should be steady
enough."

     Behind Sinbud, little dots of fusion flame now numbered over a
hundred and rising. As many more Khanate ships had not turned: they were
still on route toward the massed Khanate allies, Bandits One-Two-Three.
Other lights . . . what were they doing? Converging, then going out one
by one.

     Renner said, "Omar, get on the horn to our forces around the
Sister. Orders unchanged: leave the main fleet alone, but watch for
stragglers. Keep it expensive going through the Sister, but stay alive."

     "Fleet in being," Victoria said.

     "Right-where did you learn that phrase?"

     "It was in one of the books MacArthur left behind. The reference
was to sea power, but-"

     Mahan," Joyce said. "He wrote before space travel."

     "Oh. Victoria, I need your help."

     "Yes, Kevin."

     "I need some work done. Get the Engineers on it. We need some
alterations in Sinbad's Langston Field. Townsend can show you what we need."

     "Right away."

     "Horace, how are you feeling?"

     "I've been better, Kevin. I've been altering my will. I will need
you to witness that it is my work, and that I am in my right mind."

     "Bizarre. You never were before."

     "Kevin, you will need to be convincing. Truly. Now say, 'Horace
Bury was in his right mind,' without smiling."

     "Maybe another approach. Tonight, Igor, we must build a convincing
duplicate of Kevin Renner."

     "May we have doglike devotion this time, Master? I wanted doglike
devotion last time."

     Glenda Ruth was staring. It was something, to have shaken Glenda
Ruth Blaine.

     But it might interfere with his sense of humor, Igor!"

     "Yes, Master, yes, yes! Please may we interfere with his sense of
humor. . . . I don't have the energy, Kevin."

     "Yeah. Give me a sanity check, Horace. Glenda Ruth, listen up.
Here's what I have in mind...."

 

     Joyce's hand was steady as she poured tea into Cynthia's cup.
Acceleration was down to one-half gravity for the moment, but she didn't
expect that to last. For the past ten hours there had been sudden and
random accelerations as Sinbad avoided different attacks from the
hundreds of ships following.

     "If someone tells me that 'a stern chase is a long chase' one more
time," Joyce said, "I'll scream." She sipped carefully, then looked at
the older woman, not bothering to conceal her curiosity. "You've been
with Bury a long time. Is it always like this?"

     Cynthia's smile might have been painted on. "Not precisely. When my
uncle Nabil offered me service with His Excellency, I knew we would face
many enemies, but few of them had warships. Mostly we are concerned with
assassination."

     "What's it like, working for a man who has that many enemies?"

     "He has enemies because he is a great man," Cynthia said. "I feel
honored to serve him. When I graduated from medical school-"

     Joyce was startled and showed it despite her news training. "You're
a doctor?"

     "Yes. Does that seem so unlikely?"

     "Well, no, but-yes, actually. I thought you were a bodyguard."
Cynthia's smile softened. "I do that as well. But you were supposed to
assume I am a concubine. Thank you, I will have more tea."

     "I'm supposed to think you're a concubine. Are you?"

     "The appearance is a professional duty. Nothing else is required."

     Which could mean anything. "It must be a strange career for a doctor."

     "Call it my first career. I will have others after I retire from
His Excellency's service. And think of the stories I can tell my
children!" Cynthia's laugh was almost inaudible. "Of course first I will
have to find a father for them."

     Joyce laughed. "Looking at you, I wouldn't think that would be so
hard to do."

     Cynthia shrugged. "I have no difficulty finding lovers. And our
culture is changing. Not just on Levant."

     "That's for sure." Joyce looked around Sinbad's crowded lounge,
humans and aliens, magnate and aristocrats and naval officer, and
grinned. "That's for damned sure."

 

     The Empire ships fled across the Mote system. For Joyce it had been
three days of trying to make sense out of myriad details.

     Sinbad and Atropos had jumped into Mote system, then accelerated
toward the inner system for forty-five minutes, then coasted. Minutes
later the Khanate Warrior ships had poured through an invisible hole,
paused, then blasted away in the wrong direction. They'd used up an
hour's fuel-but at low thrust-before they found Sinbad and Atropos.

     Since then it had been a race; but there were nuances.

     Bury's couch was located near the door to the control cabin. It
made a convenient gathering point when the cabin door was open. When
Freddy went over to tell Bury what was happening, Joyce went to
listen-and noticed that Glenda Ruth didn't come over until after Joyce
had joined the party.

     "We laid low. Got them moving in the wrong direction for a while,"
Freddy said. "Odds are they can recognize our exhaust, so we didn't give
them one. Maybe they found Atropos's old-style Langston Field. But this
much for sure, they're chasing us."

     "Flattering," Glenda Ruth said.

     Freddy didn't answer.

     "Getting all our enemies into one bunch," Bury said. "It is not the
first time. On Tabletop-but that was a long time ago."

     Yeah. Well, it isn't quite working," Freddy said. "We've got maybe
a hundred twenty on our tail, out of a thousand. Three hundred kept
going; they've just about reached the Bandit cluster. We still don't
know what they think they're guarding, but never mind that. I've lost
five hundred of the buggers."

     Kevin Renner said, "They haven't disappeared. It only means they're
not under thrust."

     "What are they doing?" Glenda Ruth asked.

     Freddy shrugged. Kevin said, "Something else. Something interesting."

     Horace Bury spoke suddenly. "The thing to remember is that we've won."

     Joyce said, "I beg your pardon?"

     "The Khanate Axis will not pass Agamemnon. Will not burst free into
the Empire. They can never reclaim that option. Now their only hope is
to replace the Medina Alliance. Well, what of that? They must reproduce
Medina's agreements and fulfill them as best they can. They must even be
over cooperative, to cover promises they might be expected to remember."

     Joyce thought that through. "But they'd have to kill us all. And
our friends."

     "Silence every voice, yes. But the Empire of Man is safe now. The
Mote will be organized according to our wishes and custom. We have won
that war now," said Horace Bury. We have protected the Empire of Man,
indeed."

     And Kevin Renner was trying to swallow a laugh; but why?

     Wait- "You could do it!" Joyce cried. "I mean, I'm being very
unprofessional here, but-if push came to shove, if they've got us in a
box, you could still negotiate. The Empire could get what it wants from
the Khanate instead."

     They were looking at her. Joyce was sorry she'd spoken. Nobody
spoke until Renner said, "Yup."

     "Would you? Rather than, um, die?"

     "No."

     Now the eyes turned away, and only Glenda Ruth sighed in relief.
Joyce thought, Why not? and said, "Okay."

     "We don't want to teach the wrong lesson here, Joyce. Treachery can
become habit-forming."

 

     Five days: part acceleration, part coasting, Sinbad and Atropos led
the enemy fleet across Motie space. Five days to observe, not ust the
battle, but the people.

     Freddy Townsend was busy, too busy to talk . . . but it was more
than that.

     Freddy was avoiding Glenda Ruth, just a bit. Joyce was willing to
learn why, but she hadn't thought of an excuse to probe. And Freddy
would clam up a bit when Joyce was wearing her "reporter" hat.

     But he would talk to both women. Joyce found herself coming on to
him a little; when she caught herself at that, or when Glenda Ruth did,
she would back off; but she could loosen his tongue that way. There was
so much to understand, and Freddy was her best source of information.

     "But this is the part we're wondering about," Freddy said, and with
a woman peering over each shoulder, he moved his cursor about the
screen. "Here, a quarter of the fleet turned around to chase us. Another
third went on to join the Bandit cluster, the Khanate allies that never
went through. What are they after? Why did they think they'd find Sinbad
and Atropos in that direction?"

     "Fuel," Kevin Renner said without turning around. "They must be
desperate for fuel by now. They're trading time for fuel."

     "The rest of them turned off their drives. That lasted for hours.
Then we got this." Freddy put the cursor on a tight pattern of
blue-white points, like a cityscape or the work lights on a half built
factory. "And that's been following us, changing as it goes."

     Again Kevin spoke without turning. "We think those ships are all
linked up into one framework. They'd have broken up some ships to build
it. It took them ten hours. Then they came after us."

     "If Empire ships tried that, they'd come apart like nose wipes in
the rain," Freddy said. "Even so, they're only doing a fifth of a gee.
Hundreds of ships are following them from Bandit cluster, linking up."

     "Fuel ships, of course. I bet they're dropping stuff on the way,
too. Empty ships. Spare troops. They'll keep some framework to make
their structure stronger. Unless I'm crazy. Jesus, Freddy, I wish we
could see that thing better."

     "It looks a lot like Vermin City, backlit," Freddy said. "Not much
pattern, and that changes every minute. Okay, Joyce, Group A is still in
the lead. They'll reach us first, yes? We have to outrace them."

     "First, but with dry tanks. Group A can't maneuver," Kevin said.
"That's not going to hurt them, unfortunately, because they've guessed
where we're going. Group B might get to us late, but with fuel to maneuver."

     "You're guessing, Commodore."

     "But it's what Moties would do," Glenda Ruth said. "The ships they
start with won't be the ships that attack you."

     "Keep a watch. I want to close my eyes for an hour."

     "Yessir. Hold it! Commodore?"

     Drive lights flared where the cursor lay. "I see it," Kevin said.
"See if you can get a better picture. I have the watch."

     "What is it, Kevin?" Bury demanded.

     "Won't know for an hour," Renner said.

 

     They were building a sketchy dinner when they heard Freddy whoop.
Joyce reset the oven before she followed Glenda Ruth.

     Freddy was grinning. "Sanity check. We've been right all along.
What do you see?"

     Behind the tight pattern of blue lights that was Khanate Group B
was a looser pattern, a score of drive lights well spread out and
shifting in intensity. Kevin said, "Two of those just went out. Shot
down by our guys?"

     Freddy looked. "Our allies aren't anywhere near. It's possible of
course. Warriors are just bloody damned good at killing...Enhanced view,
Screen Two."

     "Right. Khanate rescue ships, Freddy. They're towing that cylinder
now. Rescue or salvage. And the rest are still coming . . . and there
goes another pair. They're merging. Group B must be leaving garbage and
personnel clear across the sky."

     "That'll hurt 'em."

     "It will if our allies have anything to say about it. They're
losing mass, losing numbers, losing firepower, all to get the fuel to
reach us. You agree? It's us the Warrior ships are after. The Empire ships."

     "Yes sir."

     "I should talk to Atropos

     Joyce found the next hour even more confusing. It was frustrating:
she had her news equipment, nothing was being kept from her, but she
wasn't getting a story she could tell.

     "The only thing that still concerns me is this," she heard Renner
telling Atropos. "When we go through the Crazy Eddie point, we have to
know that no Master ship has given the Warrior ships new orders.
Otherwise we'll be abandoning the Mote system to the Khanate."

     And that made sense, but how to lay it out for a viewer? If we
lose, you'll never know it. Even we may never know. If we returned via
New Cal and that little orange star, a year from now we could be talking
to a replacement Eudoxus speaking for a replacement Medina. All Moties
look alike, but these are the good guys and-?

     "Maybe later," she said to Bury. "Maybe I'll understand later."

     "And perhaps you never will," Bury said.

     "If we lose-"

     "Yes, of course, but even if we win. It has happened to me." And he
launched into another tale of his terrible past, a skewed view of Empire
history that Joyce could never have bought with pearls and rubies.

 

     There had been incidents. Sometimes the Khanate fleet beamed laser
light at them, forcing Sinbad and Atropos to take turns shadowing each
other. Renner and Townsend had at first considered this a mere annoyance.

     "Probably tryin' to distract us," Freddy said in one of the rare
intervals he was off duty. Commodore Renner kept Freddy Townsend busy.
When he did get a break, he often used the opportunity to talk to Horace
Bury; and when that happened, Joyce invited herself into the party.

     "They've scattered their fleet," Joyce said. "Some of the ships
used all their power and now can't keep up. Why would they do that, Freddy?"

     Freddy said, "I can tell you what they're doing, but why is out of
my department. You'll be famous even if you don't know why."

     Horace Bury chuckled. "I should instruct my brokers to invest in
your network. You will have the highest ratings in Imperial history, I
think."

     "A few weeks ago I would have resented your saying that," Joyce
said. "And even more resented it if you'd actually bought stock in IBC."

     "And now?"

     Joyce shrugged. "It's your ship, and we're all on it."

     "Besides, his brokers will already have made the investments,"
Glenda Ruth said.

     "Cautiously. They'll buy too little," Bury said. "After all, it was
not certain that we would be bringing Miss Trujillo to the Mote."

     "Or that we'd come out alive," Joyce said.

     "Well, if we don't, it won't matter if the investment's no good,"
Freddy said.

"Oh, Freddy, that's silly," Glenda Ruth said. "His Excellency-
"Acceleration warning. Action stations."

     "Oh, Lor', what now?" Freddy demanded.

 

     "It's a big mess of junk under high velocity," Renner said.

     Most of the leading Khanate ships were in deceleration mode at high
thrust. Most of them. A few were burning fuel at a prodigious rate and
converting that to energy beamed at Sinbad; and out of the glare of that
beam came a dark mass on a collision course.

     "We'll have to dodge," Freddy said. Sinbad began to turn.

     "Yeah. Horace, Group A ran up to maximum velocity and then stripped
their ships. It could be mostly fuel tanks. Freddy's turning the ship."

     "It won't cost us too much fuel."

     "No, but I should- Atropos calling, good." Joyce heard Renner
setting a direction for the other ship. Sinbad and Atropos would diverge.

     Four minutes later-the lightspeed gap-Group A's junk pile pulled
into two masses. They'd armed it with motors. Freddy spoke of raping his
lizard; Renner called Atropos and ordered a laser barrage.

     Four minutes later the junk pile flared with the light of Atropos's
barrage. An instant later it flashed a hundred times as bright! The
camera overloaded and burned out before Freddy could enfold Sinbad in
the Langston Field. Glenda Ruth was cowering with an arm over her eyes,
and Joyce was waiting for glowing spots to disappear. She knew better
than to interrupt Freddy or Kevin.

     Freddy spoke anyway. "They had a mirror. The clever little
nightmares waited for our beam and then threw it back at us. It's way
dimmer now, but they're still throwing sunlight at us. It's nothing,
Glenda Ruth. Just another goddamn nuisance attack."

 

     And more to understand. Medina Alliance ships trailed the Khanate
fleet, darted in toward it with a reckless expenditure of resources,
fired lasers and missiles, then darted away again, fuel gone, coasting
away from the battle to be rescued by unarmed ships from other clans.

     "Another major development," Joyce dictated. "There's a big fleet,
two hundred ships and more, trailing the Khanate war fleet. They're
rescuing ships that run out of fuel. Khanate and Alliance ships alike,
they're retrieving stragglers. We thought they were Khanate allies, but
they're not. They're neutrals.

     "We've changed Mote politics like nothing else in their history. A
hundred families and clans in cooperation, hundreds more gathering their
strength, but all of them staying uncommitted.

     "Our Motie allies say this is a good sign.

     "Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo, Imperial Post-Tribune Syndicate."

 

     "We are ninety minutes from the Alderson point everyone calls the
Crazy Eddie point. The Moties are getting nervous. No one likes Jump
shock much, but our Motie friends really dread it. We can hope the
prospect makes the Khanate Warriors nervous.

     "The situation is this: Sinbad and Atropos are on course for the
Jump point and decelerating. The leading elements of a war fleet from
Byzantium, the most powerful of our allies, have already reached the
Crazy Eddie point and are standing by for orders.

     "Meanwhile, things are happening in the pursuing fleet." Joyce
zoomed in on a screen.

     The structure they'd been calling Khanate B was under heavy
deceleration. The tremendous junk pile was no longer a single object.
The bright sparks of fusion drives were separating in pairs.

     Another screen showed a blurry picture relayed from Atropos:

two Khanate ships docked and remained docked until one reconstructed
ship began to decelerate, leaving part of its mass as debris.

     "We don't know what this means," Joyce said. Reporterspeak for I
don't know. Kevin and Freddy had given over arguing about it, but Renner
had taken time off to talk with Bury. Marooned face up in a water bed at
high gee, Horace Bury could at least use the entertainment. Joyce turned
the camera on them; they didn't notice.

     "So what have we got?" Renner said. "Group A boosted to high
velocity, coasted, and is now under deceleration. Classic. They'd get to
the Crazy Eddie point about the same time we do, but we can fix that."

     Bury wasn't asking, so Joyce did. "How?"

     Renner's glance showed his irritation. "Low thrust deceleration
now, high thrust later, brings us in sooner. They can't play that game.
They're at max thrust with no spare fuel."

     "But high thrust-"

     "As Allah wills, Joyce. What of Group 13, Kevin?"

     "Aye, there's the rub. They never turned off their drives. They did
low thrust forever, right up to midpoint turnover, and dropped mass
every step of the way. Fuel tanks, Engineers, that mirror thing, who
knows? It looks like they'll get to the Crazy Eddie point just behind
Group A, but with plenty of fuel to spare. If we miss our Jump, I'd say
we're dead. So, we're forced to jump."

     "If so, Kevin, they've made themselves very vulnerable to Medina.
The Medina forces will face seven hundred Khanate ships strung in a long
line. Is this a winning strategy? They must do more than silence all
human voices. They must control the Sister. When the Empire comes again,
the Khanate must speak first."

     "You're missing something," said Glenda Ruth Blaine.

     An odd source, but- Kevin said, "Okay. What?"

     "I don't know." She perched on the edge of the water bed and
scratched behind Ali Baba's ear. "But they're Warriors. They're
following a Master's orders, but that doesn't make them silly. Remember
their mission and look again."

     Cynthia knew how to prepare Turkish coffee. Bury sipped his and
said, "Fuel matters here. The Khanate ships are depleted. Are we? Base
Six is following us, of course."

     "They'll be a hundred and ten hours late. They can rescue any ship
that ran dry, but that doesn't help us fight. Still, we could refuel
from a Medina ship. I don't think we even need to, And we'll go through
the Crazy Eddie point at three hundred per, just like last time, with
the East India ships to triangulate for us."

     "Ah!"

     Cynthia snapped alert. "Excellency?"

     "I'm all right, Cynthia. Kevin, the debris. The mass, the junk left
over when two ships merged at a thousand klicks per second. Set Atropos
to tracking the course of the junk. You'll find that a mass equivalent
to over a hundred spacecraft is on course to pass straight through the
Crazy Eddie point just when we would like to do that."

     "Okay, lie down already. Freddy?"

     "I'm on it." Freddy Townsend was working his control board hard. A
screen lit: Rawlins's talker.

     Now why am I less scared than I was? Renner wondered. Because my
people are getting the right answers? No, more; because Horace Bury's
mind is alive and alert.

     While Freddy was at work, Renner said, "Omar, I need that debris
blocked somehow. The only ships that have to go through the Crazy Eddie
point are Atropos and Sinbad. Will you inform Medina's Masters?"

"I will learn," Omar said.

 

     Now no one had time to explain things, and her questions were
distracting. Joyce could only record everything and hope to make sense
of it later. "We've heard about the 'fog of war,' " Joyce dictated. It's
all too real. I don't know what's going on, and neither does anyone
else, not really. Sometimes you just have to make choices and stick with
them."

     With twenty minutes to go, Kevin gave the order to strap in. The
Khanate ships' stream of high-V debris couldn't be far away.

     "I have a feed from Atropos," Freddy said. "On Screen Three."

     Star-sprinkled black. Kevin said, "I don't...One bluer than the
others. That stellar background ...?' Freddy, it's a Master ship that's
just popped through. Now prove me wrong."

     Medina called. "We have a Khanate Master ship just emerged from the
Sister. One ship only. It made no attempt to communicate, so our man has
fired on it. He reports an overpowered shield."

     "One lousy Master. That's all it takes," Renner said. "We're dead."

     Bury was chuckling. "Why, Kevin?"

     "This whole thing falls apart if the Khanate Warriors get the right
orders. Here's a Master, just in time, and hell, it's even too late for
us to abort!"

     Bury was laughing with some effort. "Yes, Kevin, they can send
orders to their Warriors, but what would they say? What can they learn
in time, across a lightspeed gap of thirty-eight minutes?"

     Medina was still speaking, had said something about the barrage.
Renner hadn't caught it. "What did he say, Freddy?"

     "The Warriors will solve it. Hold to the plan."

     Pity Omar hadn't been at the comm. The lightspeed gap was already
too great to get any answers. Eight minutes. Everyone strapped in?
"Joyce! Strap in!"

     "Okay, Skipper." She'd been standing on her chair to get altitude,
photographing them at work. She dropped and strapped in, cheerful as
hell, hugging the camera like her own baby.

     The Khanate Master ship was still in view, glowing fiercely bright
in green. Medina's forces must be bathing her in energy. She'd never get
a message through that.

     The feed from twenty East India ships was providing good
triangulation: he would hit the point dead center. Bury was doing
savasama, but his heartbeat and brain-wave displays were all over the
place. Scared. Calling his attention to it would be worse than useless.
Behind Sinbad a darkness was growing . . . black dots crowding out the
stars. What the hell?

     Two minutes. And weird lighting effects among the black dots,
sparks in rainbow colors.

     The Byzantium fleet! They were blocking the Khanate barrage,
catching the stuff with their Langston Fields.

     And the Crazy Eddie point was here, now, unseen, passing at three
hundred klicks per second as Freddy touched the contact.

 

 

     Orange murk looked in through the screens. Renner, bemused and
groggy, enjoyed the appearance of a mechanical hell in which men and
monsters writhed in torment and confusion. But his memory was already
organizing itself, and he barked, though it came out a croak, "Townsend."

     "Renner. Captain. Get us behind Atropos?"

     "When I start the drive."

     Sinbad was coming alive again, but slowly. Now Afro pos was a black
near-circle against white light, unmistakable, a few hundred miles
distant . . . almost toward the core of Murcheson's Eye, according to
Sinbad's instruments.

     Fifteen minutes. Fifteen minutes to get ready, then all hell.

There was a lot to do, but some of it would have to wait for the

Motie Engineers, and they were flat out of action.

     Communications. "Atropos, this is Sinbad. Atropos, this is Sinbad,
Sinbad, Sinbad..."

     It would just be dawning on Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo that they were
inside a star. Wonder and terror and a reflex reach for the camera.
Glenda Ruth was a basket case, no better off than the Moties. "Atropos,
this is Sinbad...Others were moving. Renner craned his head around. At
least Bury wasn't thrashing. Atropos, this is Sinbad..."

     Bury was too still. "Cynthia!"

She was already loose, pulling herself against him, fingers on his
throat. "No pulse."

"Do something. Sorry, of course you will." The drive test lights blinked
green. Renner enabled the drive. "Move her, Townsend."

"Aye, aye. Acceration. Stand by."

"Sinbad, this is Atropos."

"Blaine. Good. Situation unchanged as of our Jump time."

"Unchanged as of your Jump time. Acknowledged, sir."

"Report."

     "Yes, sir. We're broadcasting on Fleet hailing frequencies.
Nobody's shot at us yet. That may be a good sign."

     Not shooting, but not answering."

     No answer yet, Commodore."

     Where the hell was Weigle and the Crazy Eddie Squadron? Silly
question. Weigle could be anywhere. "Keep trying. We'll hide behind you
when we get there."

     "Right. I'll leave the channel open."

     More movements behind him. Cynthia had reattached the medical
systems to Bury. He thrashed suddenly, and quieted. Electric shock.
Still dead. Skeletal metal arms lifted from the box, for the first time
in Kevin's memory, and began to work on Horace Bury.

     Ali Baba howled in terror.

     "Victoria. Glenda Ruth. Anyone," Kevin shouted.

     "Yes, Kevin." Renner turned joyfully. It was Bury's voice! It was Omar.

     Not Omar's fault. Renner said, "When the Engineers recover, make
sure the Flinger is ready and loaded, and keep double checking the Field
generator." They had rebuilt the Field generator, altered it so that it
would not expand and present a larger surface area to the wispy super
hot star stuff around them. Now it matched all the Crazy Eddie Squadron
ships, including Atropos.

     "Stand clear!" Cynthia shouted. "Glenda Ruth, take Ali Baba!
Clear!" Horace Bury thrashed again. Once more.

     Glenda Ruth made crooning noises. The medical-panel lights glowed,
but no sign of heart or brain activity. Dead panel, or- Glenda Ruth
said, "Kevin, Cynthia, my God, stop! He's dead!" You never know- Kevin
bit it back. She would know.

     They were alongside Atropos now. Townsend matched velocities. "Stay
alongside," Renner said. "Blaine."

"Sir?"

     "I'm changing the plan. If I'm going to use the Flinger at all,
it'll have to be before we build up too much heat, so we'll stay
alongside you for the first phase of the battle."

     "Yes, sir?"

     "Keep relaying data."

     "Aye, aye, sir. Data relay set," Blaine said.

     "Got it. Any luck contacting the Fleet?"

     "Not yet. Any further orders, Sir?"

     Renner looked back into the cabin once more. "Yes. I'm canceling
the instructions on avoiding high gees. Use any acceleration the
tactical situation demands."

 

     They saw through the eyes of Atropos. A black dot popped into
place, then another, then two more. A green thread from Atropos to one
of the intruders. The intruder's Field flared, expanded.

     "It's working," Renner said. "The Khanate ships have an expanding
Langston Field, which is great for most battles, but in here when it
expands, it picks up even more heat."

     "Could they have done what you did?" Joyce asked. "Got their
Engineers to rebuild it?"

"Omar?"

     "No data. I would not have thought of it."

     More black dots. "Freddy, stand by the finger. We'll aim for the
center of the cluster."

     "Right."

     The black dot expanded, ran through colors, and vanished. Atropos's
green thread moved to another ship.

     "Atropos."

     "Aye, aye, Commodore."

     Not Blaine. "Tell your skipper we'll commence firing when we have
twenty-five targets. Watch the data link for exact time."

     "You will fire when you have twenty-five, that's two five, targets.
Observe data link for exact time. Aye, aye, sir."

     Joyce's camera was running. Why not? What could it matter now if
everyone learned that Sinbad carried nuclear weapons?"

     'We've got another edge," Renner said. Imperial Autonetics has
developed a ship's coating that only becomes a superconductor at
forty-four hundred Kelvin. That's two hundred degrees cooler than what
it takes to soften the hull. I can run a superconducting wire into
Sinbad's water tank and then vent the steam.

     "In short, we can stay alive a long time."

     'We may need to," Freddy said. "Twenty-four."

     "Load."

     "Erecting the Flinger. Loading. Wow, it's warm out there. Fire.
Retracting the Flinger into the Field."

     A timer began on Renner's console. Twenty-nine seconds. Twenty-eight...

     A bright star within the star. Twenty black dots expanded,
stretched, added their stored heat to the white glare. Green lines
converged on another. It flashed and was gone.

     And thirty more ships appeared.

     "Stand by Flinger," Renner said.

 

     Scattered across a brilliant orange sky were sixty to seventy
colored balloons. The eye couldn't tell their distance: sizes varied too
widely. Most were red. Fewer were orange, and those faded into
invisibility until they grew hotter. A handful were green and blue,
inflating as their temperature rose, until one or another made a brief
nova. It was a kindergarten astronomy class, the stars colorcoded to
their places on the Hertzsprung-Russel diagram. Three. Two. One. Bingo,"
Freddy droned.

     Another flare. Red and yellow bubbles inflated suddenly, green,
blue, flashflashflash.

     "How many is that?" Joyce demanded.

     "Counting what Atropos bagged, over a hundred."

     "Should we be cheering? Sorry, Glenda Ruth .

     "It's all right. They're only Warriors. To the Moties they're
valuable property, but-"

     "Retracted. Seven warheads left," Freddy said. "Timing's about
right, we'll be too hot to use it pretty soon. Captain, I have to say
this is easier than I thought it would be."

     "Too easy," Renner said. "Atropos, let me speak with Captain
Rawlins, please."

     "Rawlins here."

     "This was Group A, agreed?"

     "Yes."

     "I think it's time to get the hell out of here before the B group
arrives."

     "Agreed. What course?"

     "Out of the star. Head for the Jump point to New Cal. I'll lead.
And keep calling for the Fleet."

     "To New Cal. Damn right we'll keep calling! Acceleration?"

     "Two gee's?"

     "Good enough."

 

     'Here they come!" The Atropos talker was shouting. Hundreds of
them!" Then in a calmer voice, "Sinbad, this is Atropos. Enemy fleet
coming through the Alderson point. The count is three hundred ships. We
are firing torpedoes."

     "Maybe this would be a good time to use our last loads," Townsend said.

     "I hate to fire ourselves dry, but, yeah." Renner touched keys.

"Atropos, designate us a target group, please."

     The screen jumped, and a ring appeared indicating a cluster of
ships moving together at high velocity away from the Jump point. Other
ships were appearing every second.

     "Hail Mary," Freddy Townsend said. "Okay, I've got a
solution...erecting . . . on the way. Eighty-nine seconds." The timers
began the countdown. "Of course you know we can't fight all those ships."

     "All true," Renner said. "Of course we don't have to."

     "They're not going to give up," Joyce said. "Omar, Victoria, can't
they see they've been defeated? It won't do them any good to destroy us
now!"

     They have their orders," Glenda Ruth said. "Victoria, do Warriors
ever question a Master's orders? Joyce is right, this can't do them any
good, not now. Whatever they do to us, they get back to the Mote
overheated and out of fuel, and the Alliance fleets will be waiting. Do
they know that?"

     "They know it better than you," Victoria said.

     "And they have their orders." Glenda Ruth shuddered.

     "I think it is more than that," Omar said. "If they return, it will
be the first time that Mote ships have done that. Many neutrals will
join them just for that reason. And if a sizable group comes over to them-"

     "Bandwagon," Joyce said. "Glenda Ruth, you agree?"

     "I guess I have to."

     "I have a new target group for you," Atropos said.

     "Engaging."

     "Rawlins here. Commodore, we're getting no answer from the Fleet,
and we're going to be overwhelmed."

     "Suggestions?"

     "Run for it while we can. Pop back into the Mote system, where we
have allies."

     "It's not much of a chance."

     "More than we have now," Rawlins said, Sir."

     "Actually, it's a good plan, for you," Renner said. It won't work
for us, we don't have the acceleration, but- Yeah. You do that.
Commander Rawlins, I'm ordering you to detached service. Your mission is
to survive and report to any Imperial fleet."

     "Just a minute-"

     "No, we don't have any time at all. I'm staying on course. You run
like hell. Rawlins, somebody's got to survive this. Our Moties analyze
it this way. If the enemy gets back alive, the neutrals will join the
Khanate. We can't let that happen! Rawlins, you get back into the Mote
system and let everyone know the Empire is coming!"

     There was a long pause. "Aye, aye, sir. Godspeed."

     "Godspeed. Freddy, get the Flinger ready."

     "Sinbad's last stand," Freddy said. He nodded toward Bury. "I guess
he deserves a Viking's funeral. Only there's no dog at his feet."

     The cameras went dark. We've lost the link to Atropos," Joyce
dictated quietly.

     "No shadow from Atropos now," Renner said. "Our field temp's going
up. Stand by, you'll have to fire blind after I get a quick look."

     "I've got a tentative target group. Give me a look to be sure.
Right. Launching. Retracting. Captain, I think that's it for the Flinger."

     "Agreed."

     "I hate being blind!" Joyce shouted.

     "Who doesn't?" Freddy said.

     "In the days before superconductors, we'd be getting burn throughs
now," Renner said. "I recall the battle off New Chicago. Captain
Blaine-Commander then-got his arm half-burned off. Now we sit here
comfortable."

     "Whoopee. How long do we have?" Glenda Ruth asked.

     "Hour anyway," Renner said.

     "The Engineers are rebuilding cameras," Victoria said. "And I am
informed there is a new antenna ready that might be able to communicate
with your other ship."

     "Bless you," Renner said. "Antenna, Freddy. I don't much like blind
either."

     "Identify yourself."

     "What the hell? God damn! Imperial Fleet, this is Imperial
auxiliary destroyer Sinbad, Commodore Kevin Renner commanding."

     A short delay, then the regular communications screen lit. 
'Imperial Fleet, this is INSS Atropos, William Hiram Rawlins. We are
part of the task force Agamemnon, detached to duty with Commodore Renner."

     "Are there other Imperial ships with you?"

     "None. Atropos and Sinbad," Renner shouted. "Get us a data link and
I'll prove who we are."

     "I may have a better way. Put Lieutenant Blaine on."

     "Atropos here. Here's Blaine. Admiral, if you're going to help us,
you better be damn quick about it! We're in trouble."

     "We can see that. Blaine, who am I?"

     "Captain Damon Collins," Blaine's voice answered quickly.

     "Right. Blaine, tell me something a Motie wouldn't know."

     "Poker. That first game. I know how you beat me, Captain."

     "Remind me."

     Renner made sure the mike was off. "I hope it's not a long story."

     But Blaine was talking fast. "I'd never played Big Squeeze before.
High-low, six cards plus a replacement. We had our six. I was showing
two little pair up, and two down cards. You had three hearts and a
something, club six maybe-"

     "It's coming back."

     "-nothing bigger than a nine I threw a down card. You threw the
nine of hearts. Pulled the jack of hearts. We declared, both high. You
had the flush."

     "You swore you'd never figure out how I did that."

     "I worked it out after the next game. What happened was, you
already had your flush, but you had a shot at low hand, too. I was
betting like I had a full house. You believed me. You threw your flush
away and got it back with your low hand ruined. 'Rape my lizard,' you
said to yourself-"

"And beat you for the very last time." 'Fyunch(click)."

"Enough," another voice said. "Is it Blaine?"

"Definitely, Admiral."

     "Sinbad and Atropos. Converge on the Flag. We're sending escorts.
All squadrons, engage enemy closely."

 

 

Epilogue Endgame

     To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive, and the true
success is to labour.

 

-Robert Louis Stevenson

 

 

Inner Base Six had lost 80 percent of its mass. Its skin was wrinkled
and folded. Despite the Engineers' busy maintenance, pipes and lines
were bent in curves and loops, and domes edged against each other. The
sky was clotted with spacecraft waiting to be refueled.

     From the stretched-taffy look of the ice around the Mosque, it must
have been twisted almost horizontal, then later pulled back to true. No
damage showed. If anything, it had been improved.

     The tremendous space of the Great Hall now sprouted semicircular
balconies at every level. Men and Moties clustered on the balconies in
groups of three or ten, sometimes shouting or even jump/flying from
balcony to balcony. Diplomacy moved at a breakneck pace here, slowing
down at times to accommodate human minds.

     What Joyce was doing wouldn't have worked in the older Mosque;
wouldn't have worked without the gyrostabilized camera either.

     In the diminished gravity Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo was leaping from
balcony to balcony stopping to swing the camera at Nabil and a handful
of Moties, again with Glenda Ruth and her brother to do a short
interview, then leaping on. She looked like some lovely goddess moving
from cloud to cloud, gradually approaching earth.

     She reached the floor flushed with the exercise, started to say
something to Kevin, then swung toward the great monitor screen.

     The great blue-and-white sphere filled most of the view. Cloud
patterns streamed sluggishly across continents whose borders were marked
all in circles. "That's Mote Prime! Isn't it, Kevin? I can see the
craters. I came to see Mote Prime, and we've been here seven bloody
months without coming anywhere near it!"

     He put a hand out to steady her in the minuscule gravity. "You
won't get any closer this trip. The good news is, they still don't seem
to have any kind of access to space. That footage was taken from a
Medina ship skimming just above the clouds, pole to pole, and nobody
tried to shoot back."

     "I would have loved to see the Zoo."

     "Probably gone by now. Things don't last among Moties."

     Joyce and camera faced him. "So it's a blockade again, but with
Moties in charge."

     "Subject to approval from home."

     "Of course." Joyce switched off the camera. "Off the record? You
don't have any doubts, do you, Kevin?"

     "Plenty. How do we use the worm here? We could pick a faction on
Mote Prime-maybe King Peter's family survived-and distribute it. Or not.
Or not yet. The Crazy Eddie Worm is still experimental. Say

     "What?"

     "Bear with me a second, Joyce. Victor! Dammit, that worm's done it.
Mediators really do all look alike now. Victor? All just out of
adolescence."

     The Mediator who had been the Tartars' Victoria bounded toward them
in a low arc. "Kevin?"

     "Yeah. Victor, sooner or later you'll be in contact with Mote
Prime. We want certain bodies returned to us for proper burial. Three
human males, Midshipmen Potter, Staley, Whitbread. They may have been
dissected, God knows what, but please retrieve them at your earliest
convenience."

     It will be done. If there is any successor to the group that held
them. Things change rapidly there."

     "Some don't. Try."

     "Yes. Anything else?"

"Yeah. Joyce, guess what the Bandit Group was guarding?"

     "Some weapons cache that was too far away to use," Joyce said promptly.

     "No. It was the Khanate's main base, including all their wealth.
They offered it all as bribes to their allies, and the allies have
turned it all over to Medina. Victor, did your people find any surprises?"

     "Not to us. We'll make holos, Kevin. Their Engineers are ingenious;
you'll see some interesting innovations in the hardware."

Joyce considered the nuances. She turned the camera on Victor.

"Then it's over? The Khanate didn't just surrender, they meant it."

     Kevin caught Glenda Ruth Blaine's semaphore wave, halfway up the
Great Hall's curved roof, and her all-too-knowing smile. Kevin grinned
and waved back. No hiding anything. Dammit, Joyce had caught it, too.

     "We control all of what was Khanate wealth," Victor answered. "The
families have returned from hiding at Bury's Star, and all of them now
carry the worm. I see no way in which they could harm us or you, ever
again. Their line is at an end, unless we choose differently; would not
that satisfy Horace Bury's anger?"

     Joyce answered carefully. "As much as I came to know Bury, I think
he had no anger left for Moties. This was his last corporate war. I
believe he enjoyed it very much."

     The Motie smiled and moved on. Kevin felt his eyes begin to sting.
He said, "That was wonderfully well said."

     "Thank you. I actually miss him, Kevin. Not like you, I expect.
Almost thirty years."

     "Yeah. But he did go out a winner, and .. . I can't seem to decide
how to feel about finally being free of the old man's power games, Life
is about to turn simpler."

     "What was the smirk about?"

     "Smirk?" Joyce's black eyebrows came together and he said, "It's a
secret. There are still secrets. Dammit, Joyce, is every woman going to
go around reading my mind for the rest of my life?"

     "This isn't any diplomatic secret, Kevin. And it isn't a scandal
because you'd never be stupid enough ... you wouldn't."

     "Joyce, there is a secret you should not hear. Just like last time,
when Eudoxus read your feet."

     She swallowed her first answer. "Maybe, but I have to have it."

     "Okay." Kevin Renner began to talk.

 

 

     Inner Base Six had been following the Empire ships. Renner took his
own sweet time returning thence, sending the Blockade Fleet ships on
ahead, thrusting at half a gee while he and his people healed. It still
took him only eight days.

     On the afternoon of the sixth day he found Glenda Ruth perched on
the arm of his chair with a tray in her hand. He settled in with his
lunch and said, "Talk."

     She didn't seem able to.

     "Freddy," he said. "Aristocrat. Just a touch lazy by my admittedly
rigorous standards. Didn't want to join the Navy. He'll have precious
little choice now. They'll hit him with major medals and a Reserve
commission."

     "Good motivation," Glenda Ruth said. "Put him in charge of avoiding
a war so he won't have to work."

     "He tenses up when you're around. What's he afraid of? You're too
sensitive?"

     "Squeamish," she said. "Whoever gets hurt around me, child or adult
or cat or Motie, I feel it. But I had as much to do with saving us as he
did. More. Kevin-"

     "Glenda Ruth."

     "Oh. Sorry." She shifted to the navigator's empty chair and slumped
a little and smiled at him.

     I was going to say . . . oh." That wide, her smile looked a little
vacuous. "You got it."

     Glenda Ruth said, "Please turn down the sex appeal because it makes
me uncomfortable."

     "Yeah. And I don't doubt you could turn it up again if I need to
remember what gender I am."

     "Maybe not. Kevin, you've stopped thinking of me as not quite human."

     "Don't test that out, okay?" Unless you mean it .. . no, dammit,
seducing Lord Blaine's daughter is one of the many things I'm going to
skip in this life. "Sure you're human. You may be a great many humans.
Every child does a lot of role-playing. You and Chris would do it better
than most. What kind of role have you been playing with Freddy?"

     "I haven't been playing! Uncle Kevin, I was running a game on the
Tartars, for our lives and the Empire. There wasn't room to play that
many games. He's seen what I am. I'm squeamish. When it all gets too
much for me, I hide."

     "You could get him back. He can't drop you, he's got obligations,
and if you work on him for an hour, he'll never want to again. So what's
really bothering you, Glenda Ruth? Turn it off!"

     She shifted in her chair. The blood was thundering in Renner's
ears. To his skewed perception she was going off and on like a light
bulb. She asked, "What if I'm serious?"

     "Get frivolous!"

     "You're so wary of rubbing up against a lord's daughter. I can talk
anyone into anything, Kevin. I can make mistakes and damage people, and
I've done it, and so's Chris. You'd think I was a real fool, wouldn't
you, if I weren't testing my limits?"

     Kevin considered retreating to his own cabin and locking his door.
But first he said, "I'm not just your randomly chosen dirty old man. I'm
the junior officer who ordered Lady Sally Fowler to Captain Roderick
Blaine's room when I felt it necessary to their survival. You're my
responsibility."

     She stared, then burst out laughing. That was better. He asked,

"What do I have to do to get you to turn off?" She was off. She said,
"I'm sorry."

     "I'm human. You don't need proof."

     "I've been in Freddy's bed. He'd have gone crazy . . . well,
antisocial, at least, if I hadn't. But I've only just got some freedom.
What I think I want to do is turn Freddy loose with the option to marry
him later, But he saw me do something he didn't like, and now I could
lose him."

     "Let's see. He'd marry you-"

     "Because he'd have to."

     "You're a nineteen-year-old girl. Being confused is part of the
game. But look: he thinks he'd like to avoid you for a while. Let him.
You free him of all obligation, you make it clear you mean it, and
you're not mad. He'll be meeting you for years, lady! You're the heroes
of the Mote Conquest! When you want him back, flash him. Agh! Not me!"

     "Yes, Uncle."

     "I think you'll want him. Good genes, good attitude, your families
will approve, and in a pinch you're both survivors. Finding that out can
be very expensive."

     "Still breeding Blaines, are we, Uncle?" And she'd gone away. And
Kevin Renner was suddenly very tired....

 

 

 

     "So I went for a nap. And two hours later you were at my door-"

     "Horny as hell."

     "Suddenly taken horny, and curious, too. You wouldn't let me get
back to sleep after-"

     "We didn't just talk."

"No."

     "And nobody smirked when I moved into your cabin."

     "They were much relieved. Two extra cubic inches for everyone
aboard Sinbad. Luxury beyond your wildest dreams. But-"

     "I can't think what took me so long," Joyce Mei-Ling said. "I guess
I was still mad at Chris. No, he didn't lie to me, I guess-"

     "Sure he-"

     "But this is no secret, Kevin! You and Glenda Ruth know something."

     "But do you remember what I asked you?"

     Her brow furrowed. She said, "Where did I just come from? I was in
the galley with a tea bulb. Where was Glenda Ruth Blaine? Having tea
with me. You laughed. Then I rubbed up against you and the conversation
went all to hell."

     She sent you. She was grateful, so she sent me a gift."

     "Oh, the hell she did! Kevin, all we talked about...

     He waited for her to finish. Presently he said, "All I had to ask
was, 'Who were you talking to a moment ago?'

     "But I just . . . came to realize. You're the quintessence of
availability. No visible ties, wealth, heroism, and you know more about
current Mote affairs than any other human being in the Empire of Man!
Glenda Ruth didn't ... we only talked about ... dammit."

     "I don't really know if you'll ever want to see me again, Joyce.
But if you do, there are secrets that you should not know, and by God I
will keep the next one."

 

 

     There were two message cubes labeled and dated. One had been given
to Nabil for safekeeping aboard Base Six. The other was dictated during
the long chase across the Mote system and completed just before Sinbad
jumped across into Murcheson's Eye.

     "Should we be looking at this?" Renner asked. "I thought we were
supposed to wait for lawyers."

     Nabil's leathery face was a mask. "Commodore, His Excellency has
instructed on the package that you review this immediately." He pointed
to a scrawl in Arabic. "This is your name."

     "Okay."

     "It also instructs me to invite witnesses, specifically Glenda Ruth
Blaine and Frederick Townsend, and as many alliance Motie Mediators as
may conveniently be assembled," Nabil said. "Beyond that I know nothing."

     They began with the cube dictated aboard Sinbad. It showed Bury in
his couch. His face was drawn and his voice exhausted. The authenticity
of the cube was witnessed by Joyce Mei-Ling Trujillo and Glenda Ruth Blaine.

"That's one picture of me I'll never put on the news," Joyce said.

     "I am Horace Hussein al-Shamlan Bury, trader, Magnate Citizen

of the Empire of Man, pasha and citizen of the planetary principality of
Ikhwan al-Muslimun, known commonly as Levant.

     "This is a codicil to my will and testament left in the safekeeping
of my true and faithful servant Nabil Ahmed Khadurri. I hereby confirm
all bequests made in that previous testament, except as may be directly
and explicitly contradicted in this codicil. I dictate this document in
the full knowledge that neither it nor this ship is likely to survive
our present mission; but Allah may will differently.

     "I hereby name Kevin Renner, commodore of the Imperial Space Navy,
as executor to my will and confer on him full executive power to execute
my wishes and dispose of my property in accordance with my original will
as amended by this codicil. This supersedes the appointment of
ibn-Farouk named as executor in the original testament. Kevin, I suggest
but do not require that you delegate the detailed implementation of my
will, and particularly supervising the bequests of entailed property on
Levant, to the law firm of Farouk, Halstead, and Harabi, and I commend
to you its senior partner, ibn-Farouk, as a longtime friend and
counselor. I believe you will recall meeting him from time to time.

     "I confirm the bequest of my house, my lands, and all entailed
properties on Ikhwan al-Muslimun shall be divided among my blood
relatives by the laws of my home planet; except that to my great-nephew
Elie Adjami I leave the sum of one crown and what he has stolen from me.
It is less than the law would have given him, but the choice was his.

     "It is my strong recommendation to the Empire that Kevin Renner be
appointed the first governor of the Mote system, and it is my belief
that the Empire will make that appointment."

     "Great Ghu," Renner said.

     "My God, Kevin, I think they will," Joyce said.

     "Governor or not, I know that Kevin Renner will be ridden by demons
if he cannot observe future events in the Mote system. I confess I wish
I could be there myself. To aid Kevin Renner in satisfying his
compulsive curiosity, I bequeath to him my personal ship known as
Sinbad; and since I know that he has not stolen any of my money, and
certainly has not enough to operate my ship, I leave to him the sum of
ten million crowns in cash to be paid after liquidation of assets other
than Imperial Autonetics as described in the main body of my will, such
to be deducted from the residual properties; and also I leave to Kevin
Renner ten thousand and one shares of voting stock in Imperial
Autonetics. Kevin, that's five percent plus one share of the company,
and there's a reason I want you to have it.

     "The balance of my holdings of Imperial Autonetics, amounting to an
additional sixty-five percent of the total voting stock, shall be
divided as follows:

     "To my oldest living grandson, thirty-nine thousand nine hundred
and ninety-nine shares. To Eudoxus as representative of the Motie family
known as Medina Traders, thirty thousand shares. To Omar as
representative of the Motie Family known as the East India Company,
twenty thousand shares. To Victoria as representative of the Motie
Family known as the Crimean Tartars, five thousand shares. To the Motie
Mediator known as Au Baba, thirty thousand shares."

     Bury's image chuckled. And well he might, Renner thought. "The
remaining shares are held by partners, banks, business concerns, and
other humans scattered through the Empire. If you care to contemplate
the possible voting blocks, you will find the combinations interesting.
Kevin, Allah has willed that you shall live in interesting times, and I
do no more than abet His will.

     "One final bequest: to Roderick, Lord Blaine, onetime captain of
the Imperial cruiser MacArthur, I bequeath the personal sealed files
designated with his name. They contain information about agents who have
been useful to the Empire of Man, but who may now be dangerous. I know
that Lord Blaine will satisfactorily carry the moral obligations of this
knowledge.

     "As for the rest, you will find the details in the cube I have
entrusted to Nabil. I have provided generously for those who have served
me faithfully. I believe that I have faithfully discharged my duties to
Allah, to my compatriots, and to the Empire; and whatever Allah wills
for my future, I am content that we have done all we could do.

     "Witness my voice and signature, Horace Hussein al-Shamlan Bury,
aboard the ship Sinbad somewhere in the Mote system."

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Look round our world; behold the chain of love.

Confirming all below and all above,

See plastic nature working to his end,

The single atoms each to other tend,

Attract, attracted to, the next in place

Form'd and impell'd its neighbor to embrace.

See matter next, with various life endu'd

Press to one center still, the gen'ral good.

See dying vegetables life sustain,

See life dissolving vegetate again;

All forms that perish other forms supply,

(By turns we catch the vital breath and die)

Like bubbles on the sea of matter born,

They rise, they break, and to that sea return.

Nothing is foreign; parts relate to whole;

One all-extending all-preserving soul

Connects each being, greatest with the least;

Made beast in aid of man and man of beast;

All serv'd, all serving! nothing stands alone;

The chain holds on, and where it ends, unknown.

 

 

     -Alexander Pope, An Essay on Man

 

