
Clifford D. Simak 

Shakespeare's Planet 

Copyright © 1976 Clifford D. Simak 



1 
THERE were three of them, although sometimes there was only one of them. 
When that came 
about, less often than it should, the one was not aware there ever had been 
three, for the one was a 
strange melding of their personalities, When they became as one, the 
transformation was something 
more than a simple addition of the three, as if by this pooling of themselves 
there had been added a 
new dimension which made the sum of them greater than the whole. It was only 
when the three 
were one, a one unconscious of the three, that the melding of three brains and 
of three personalities 
approached the purpose of their being. 
They were the Ship and the Ship was them. To become the Ship or to attempt to 
become the 
Ship, they had sacrificed their bodies and, perhaps, a great deal of their 
humanity. Sacrificed, 
perhaps their souls as well, although that was something no one, least of all 
themselves, ever agreed 
on. This disagreement, it should be noted, stood quite apart from any belief or 
disbelief that they 
might have souls. 
They were in space, as was the Ship, and this was understandable since they were 
the Ship. 
Naked to the loneliness and emptiness of space as the Ship was naked. Naked at 
once to the concept 
of space, which is not understood in its entirety, and to the concept of time, 
which is, in the final 
accounting, less understandable than space. And naked, too, they finally found, 
to those attributes of 
space and time, infinity and eternity; two concepts that stand beyond the 
capability of any 
intelligence. 
As the centuries went on, they were collectively convinced they would become, in 
all truth, the 
Ship and nothing but the Ship, sloughing off all they had ever been before. But 
they had not reached 
that point yet. Humanity still persisted; memory still hung on. They still, at 
times, felt the old 
identities, perhaps with some of the sharpness dulled, with the pride less 
bright; because of the 
nagging doubt that they had been quite as noble in their sacrifices as they, at 
one time, had been 
able to convince themselves. For it finally came to them, although not to all of 
them at once, but one 
by one, that they had been guilty of semantic shuffling, using the term 
sacrifice to becloud and 
camouflage their basic selfishness. One by one, it came to them in those tiny 
intervals when they 
were truly honest with them selves, that the nagging doubts which hounded them 
might be more 
important than the pride. 
At other times, old triumphs and regrets came surging out of time long gone and 
alone, not 
sharing with the others, each fondled the old triumphs and regrets, obtaining 
from them a 
satisfaction they would not admit, even to themselves. On occasion they stood 
aside from one 
another and talked to one another. This was a most shameful thing and they knew 
that it was 
shameful, delaying the time when they could finally sink their own identities 
into the one identity 
that came about through the consolidation of their three identities. In their 
more honest moments 
they realized that in doing this they were instinctively shying away from that 
final loss of personal 
identity which is the one outstanding terror all sentient life associates with 
death. 
Usually, however, and increasingly as time went on, they were the Ship, and the 
Ship alone, and 
in this there was a satisfaction and a pride, and at times a certain holiness. 
The holiness was a 
quality that could not be defined In words or delineated in a thought, for it 
was outside and beyond 

2
any sensation or accomplishment that the creature known as man could have 
conjured up even in 
the utmost exercise of his not inconsiderable imagination, It was, in a way, a 
sense of minor 
brotherhood with both time and space, the sense of being one, strangely 
identified, with the space-
time concept, that hypothetical condition which is the basic pattern of the 
universe. Under this 
condition they were kin to the stars and neighbor of the galaxies, while the 
emptiness and 
loneliness, although never losing frightfulness, became familiar ground. 
In the best of times, when they most nearly came to their final purpose, the 
Ship faded from their 
consciousness and they alone, the consolidated one of them alone, moved across 
and through and 
over the loneliness and emptiness, no longer naked, but a native of the universe 
that was now their 
country. 

2 
SHAKESPEARE said to Carnivore, "The time is nearly come. Life fades rapidly; I 
can feel it 
go. You must be ready. Your fangs must pierce the flesh in that small moment 
before death. You 
must not kill me, but eat me even as I die. And you remember, surely, all the 
rest of it. You do not 
forget all that 1 have told you. You must be the surrogate of my own people 
since none of them is 
here. As best friend, as only friend, you must not shame me as I depart from 
life." 
Carnivore crouched and shivered. "It is not something that I asked," he said. 
"It is not something 
that I would elect to do. It is not my way to kill the old or dying. My prey 
must be always full of life 
and strength. But as one life to another, as one intelligence to another, I 
cannot refuse you. You say 
it is a holy thing, that I perform a priestly office and this is something from 
which one must never 
shrink, although every instinct in me cries out against the eating of a friend." 

"I hope," said Shakespeare, "that my flesh be not too tough nor the flavor 
strong. I hope the 
ingestion of it does not make you gag." 
"I shall not gag," promised Carnivore. "I shall be strong against it. I shall 
perform most truly. I 
shall do everything you ask. I shall follow all instructions. You may die in 
peace and dignity, 
knowing that your last and truest friend will carry out the offices of death. 
Although you will permit 
me the observation that this is the strangest and the most obnoxious ceremony I 
have ever heard of 
in a long and misspent life." 
Shakespeare chuckled weakly. "I will allow you that," he said. 

3 
CARTER HORTON came alive. He was, it seemed, at the bottom of a well. The well 
was filled 
with fuzzy darkness 
and, in sudden fright and anger, he tried to free himself of the fuzz and 
darkness and climb out 
of the well. But the darkness wrapped itself about him, and the fuzziness made 
it difficult to move. 
After a time he lay quiet. His mind clicked hesitantly as he sought to know 
where he was and how 
he might have gotten there, but there was nothing to give him any answers. He 
had. no memories at 
all. Lying quietly, he was surprised to find that he was comfortable and warm, 
as if he had been 
always there, comfortable and warm, and only aware now of the comfort and the 
warmth. 
But through the comfort and the warmth, he felt a frantic urgency and wondered 
why. It was quite 
enough, he told himself, to continue as he was, but something in him shouted 
that it was not 
enough. He tried again to climb out of the well, to shake off the fuzziness and 
darkness, and failing, 
fell back exhausted. 
Too weak, he told himself, and why should he be weak? 
He tried to shout to attract attention, but his voice would not work. Suddenly 
he was glad it 
didn't, for until he was stronger, he told himself, it might be unwise to 
attract attention. For he did 
not know where he was or what or who might be lurking near, nor with what 
intent. 
He settled back into the darkness and the fuzziness, confident that it would 
conceal him from 
whatever might be there, and was a bit amused to find he felt a slow, seeping 
anger at being forced 
thus to huddle against attention. 
Slowly the fuzziness and the darkness went away, and he was surprised to find 
that he was not in 

3
any well. Rather, he seemed to be in a small space that he now could see. 
Metal walls went up on either side of him and curved, only a foot or so above 
his head, to form a 
ceiling. Funny-looking gadgets were retracted into slots in the ceiling just 
above his head. At the 
sight of them, memory began seeping back, and carried by that memory was a sense 
of cold, 
Thinking about it, he could not recall an actual coldness, although the sense of 
cold was there. As 
the memory of the cold reached out to touch him, he felt a surge of 
apprehension. 
Hidden fans were blowing warm air over him, and he then understood the warmth. 
He was 
comfortable, he realized, because he was lying on a soft, thick pad placed upon 
the floor of the 
cubicle. Cubicle, he thought--even the words, the terminology, were beginning to 
come back. The 
funny-looking gadgets stored in the ceiling slots were part of the life-support 
system, and they were 
there, he knew, because he didn't need them any more. The reason he didn't need 
them any more, 
he realized, was that Ship had landed. 
Ship had landed and he had been awakened from his cold-sleep--his body thawed, 
the recovery 
drugs shot into his bloodstream, carefully measured doses of high-energy 
nutrients fed slowly into 
him, massaged and warmed and alive once more. Alive, if he had been dead. 
Remembering, he 
recalled the endless discussions over this very question, mulling over it, 
chewing it, lacerating it, 
shredding it to pieces and then trying to put the pieces meticulously back 
together. They called it 
cold-sleep, sure--they would call it that, for it had a soft and easy sound. But 
was it sleep or death? 
Did one go to sleep and wake? Or did one die and come to resurrection? 
It didn't really matter now, he thought. Dead or sleeping, he was now alive. I 
be damned, he told 
himself, the system really worked--realizing for the first time that he had held 
some doubt of it 
really working despite all the experiments that had been carried out with mice 
and dogs and 
monkeys. Although, he remembered, he had never spoken of the doubts, concealing 
them not only 
from the others, but from himself as well. 
And if he were here alive, so would the others be. In just a few more minutes 
he'd crawl Out of 
the cubicle and the others would be there, the four of them reunited. It seemed 
only yesterday that 
they had been together--as if they'd spent the evening in one another's company 
and now, after a 
short night's sleep, had awakened from a dreamless night. Although he knew it 
would be much 
longer than that--as much as a century, perhaps. 
He twisted his head to one side and saw the hatch, with the port of heavy glass 
set into it. 
Through the glass he could see into the tiny room, with the four lockers ranged 
against the wall. 
There was no one about--which meant, he told himself, the others were still in 
their cubicles. He 
considered shouting to them, but thought better of it. It would be unseemly, he 
thought--too 
exuberant and somewhat juvenile. 
He reached out a hand to the latch and pulled down on it. it operated stiffly, 
but finally he got it 
down and the hatch swung out. He jackknifed his legs to thrust them through the 
hatch and had 
trouble doing it, for there was little room. But finally he got them through, 
and twisting his body, 
slid carefully to the floor. The floor was icy to his feet, and the metal of the 
cubicle was cold, 
Stepping quickly to the adjacent cubicle, he peered through the glass of the 
hatch and saw that it 
was empty, with the life-supports retracted into the ceiling slots. The other 
two cubicles were empty 
as well. He stood transfixed with horror. The other three, revived, would not 
have left him. They 
would have waited for him so they all could go out together. They would have 
done this, he was 
convinced, unless something unforeseen had happened. And what could have, 
happened? 
Helen would have waited for him, he was sure of that. Mary and Tom might have 
left, but Helen 
would have waited. 
Fearfully, he lunged at the locker that had his name upon it. He had to jerk 
hard on the handle 
once he had turned it to get the locker open. The vacuum inside the locker 
resisted, and when the 
door came open, it opened with a pop. Clothing hung upon the racks and footwear 
was ranged 
neatly in a row. He grabbed a pair of trousers and climbed into them, forced his 
feet into a pair of 
boots. When he opened the door of the suspension room, he saw that the lounge 
was empty and the 
ship's main port stood open. He raced across the lounge to the open port. 
The ramp ran down to a grassy plain that swept off to the left. To the right, 
rugged hills sprang up 

4
from the plain and beyond the hills a mighty mountain range, deep blue with 
distance, reared into 
the sky. The plain was empty except for the grass, which billowed like an ocean 
as wind gusts 
swept across it. The hills were covered with trees, the foliage of which was 
black and red. The air 
had a sharp, fresh tang to it. There was no one in sight. 
He went halfway down the ramp and still no one was in sight. The planet was an 
emptiness and 
the emptiness seemed to be reaching out for him. He started to cry out to ask if 
anyone were there, 
but fear and the emptiness dried up the words and he could not get them out. He 
shivered in the 
realization that something had gone wrong. This was not the way it should be. 
Turning, he went clumping up the ramp and through the lock. 
"Ship!" he yelled. "Ship, what the hell is going on?" 
Ship said, calmly, unconcernedly, inside his mind, What's the problem, Mr. 
Horton? 
"What's going on?" yelled Horton, more angry now than frightened, angered by the 
supercilious 
calmness of this great monster, Ship. "Where are all the others?" 
Mr. Horton, said Ship, there aren't any others. 
"What do you mean there aren't any others? Back on Earth there was a team of 
us." 
You are the only one, said Ship. 
"What happened to the others?" 
They are dead, said Ship. 
"Dead? How do you mean, dead? They were with me just the other day!" 
They were with you, said Ship, a thousand years ago. 
"You're insane. A thousand years!" 
That's the span of time, said Ship, speaking still inside his mind, we have been 
gone from Earth. 
Horton heard a sound behind him and spun about. A robot had come through the 
port. 
"I am Nicodemus," said the robot. 
He was an ordinary robot, a household service robot, the kind that back on Earth 
would be a 
butler or a valet, or a cook or errand boy. There was no mechanical 
sophistication about him; he 
was just a sloppy, flat-footed piece of junk. 
You need not, said Ship, be so disdainful of him. You will find him, we are 
sure, to be quite 
efficient. 
"Back on Earth..." 
Back on Earth, said Ship, you trained with a mechanical marvel that had far too 
much that could 
go wrong with it. Such a contraption could not be sent out on a long-haul 
expedition. There would 
be too much chance of it breaking down. But with Nicodemus there is nothing to 
go wrong. Because 
of his simplicity he has high survival value. 
"I am sorry," Nicodemus said to Horton, "that I was not present when you woke. I 
had gone out 
for a quick scout around. I had thought there was plenty of time to get back to 
you. Apparently, the 
recovery and reorientation drugs worked much more swiftly than I'd thought. It 
usually takes a fair 
amount of time for recovery from cold-sleep. Especially cold-sleep of such long 
duration. How are 
you feeling now?" 
"Confused," said Horton. "Completely confused. Ship tells me I am the only human 
left, 
implying that the others died." And he said something about a thousand years. . 
To be exact, said Ship, nine hundred fifty-four years, eight months and nineteen 
days. 
"This planet," said Nicodemus, "is a very lovely one. In many ways like Earth. 
Slightly more 
oxygen, a bit less gravity. . ." 
"All right," said Horton, sharply, "after all these years we are finally landed 
on a very lovely 
planet. What happened to all the other lovely planets? In almost a thousand 
years, moving close to 
the speed of light, there must have been. . 
"Very many planets," Nicodemus said, "but none of them lovely. Nothing a human 
could exist 
upon. Young planets, with the crusts unformed, with fields of bubbling magma and 
great volcanoes, 
vast pools of molten lava, the sky seething with boiling clouds of dust and 
poisonous vapors and as 
yet no water and little oxygen. Old planets slipping down to death, the oceans 
dry, the atmosphere 
thinned out, without sign of life upon them--life, if it ever had existed, now 
wiped out. Massive gas 

5
planets rolling along their orbits like great striped marbles. Planets too close 
to their suns, scoured 
by solar radiation. Planets too far from their suns, with glaciers of frozen 
oxygen, seas of slushy 
hydrogen. Other planets that somehow had gone wrong, clothed in atmosphere 
deadly to all life. 
And a few, a very few, too, lusty with life--jungle planets occupied by ravening 
life-forms so 
hungry and ferocious that it would have been suicidal to set foot upon them. 
Desert planets where 
life had never started--barren rock, with no soil ever formed, with very little 
water, the oxygen 
locked in eroding rock. We orbited some of the planets that we found; we merely 
glanced at others. 
A few we landed on. Ship has all the data if you want a printout." 
"But now we've found one planet. What do we do now-- look it over and go back?" 
No, said Ship, we can't go back. 
"But this is what we came out for. We and the other ships, all of them hunting 
planets the human 
race could colonize." 
We've been out too long, said Ship. We simply can't go back. We've been out 
almost a thousand 
years. If we started back right now, it would take almost another thousand 
years. Perhaps a little 
less, for we'd not be slowing down to have a look at planets, but still not too 
far from two thousand 
years from the time we left. Perhaps a great deal longer, for time dilation 
would be a factor, and we 
have no reliable data on dilation. By now we've probably been forgotten. There 
would have been 
records, but more than likely they now are lost or forgotten or misplaced. By 
the time we got back, 
we'd be so outdated that the human race would have no use for us. We and you and 
Nicodemus. 
We'd be an embarrassment to them, reminding them of their bumbling attempts of 
centuries before. 
Nicodemus and we would be technologically obsolescent. You'd be obsolescent as 
well, but in 
another way--a barbarian come from the past to haunt them. You'd be outdated 
socially, ethically, 
politically. You'd be, by their standards, a possibly vicious moron. 
"Look," protested Horton, "there is no sense in what you say. There were other 
ships. . 
Perhaps some of them found suitable planets, said Ship, shortly after they had 
left. In such cases 
they could safely have returned to Earth. 
"But you went on and on." 
Ship said, We performed our mandate. 
"You mean, you hunted planets." 
We hunted for one particular planet. The kind of planet where man could live. 
"And took almost a thousand years to find it." 
There was no time limit on the search, said Ship. 
"I suppose not," said Horton, "although it was something we never thought about. 
There were a 
lot of things we never thought about. A lot of things, I suppose, we were never 
told. Then tell me 
this: Suppose you'd not found this planet. What would you have done?" 
We'd have kept on searching. 
"A million years, perhaps?" If need be, a million years, said Ship. 
"And now, having found it, we cannot go back." 
That is correct, said Ship. 
"So what's the good of finding it?" asked Horton. "We find it, and Earth will 
never know we 
found it. The truth of the matter is, I think, that you have no interest in 
returning. There is nothing 
back there for you." 
Ship made no answer. 
"Tell me," Horton cried. "Admit it." Nicodemus said, "You'll get no answer now. 
Ship stands on 
silent dignity. You have offended it." 
"To hell with Ship," said Horton. "I've heard enough from them. I want some 
answers from you. 
Ship said the other three are dead . . ." 
"There was a malfunction," said Nicodemus. "About a hundred years out. One of 
the pumps 
ceased functioning, and the cubicles heated up. I managed to save you." 
"Why me? Why not one of the others?" 
"It was very simple," said Nicodemus, reasonably. "You were number one on line. 
You were in 
cubicle number one." 

6
"If I had been in cubicle number two, you would have let me die." 
"I let no one die. I was able to save one sleeper. Having done that, it was too 
late for the others." 
"You did it by the numbers?" 
"Yes," said Nicodemus, "I did it by the numbers. Is there a better way?" 
"No," said Horton. "No, I guess there's not. But when three of us were dead, was 
there no thought 
of aborting the mission and going back to Earth?" 
"There was no thought of it." 
"Who made the decision? I imagine Ship." 
"There was no decision. Neither of us ever mentioned it." It had all gone wrong, 
thought Horton. 
If someone had sat down and worked at it, with wholehearted concentration and a 
devotion that 
fringed on fanaticism, they couldn't have done a better job of screwing it all 
up. 
A ship, one man, one flat-footed stupid robot--Christ, what an expedition! And, 
furthermore, a 
pointless one-way expedition. We might just as well not have started out, he 
thought. Except that if 
they hadn't started out, he reminded himself, he'd now be dead for many 
centuries. 
He tried to remember the others, but could not remember them. He could see them 
only dimly, as 
if he were seeing them through fog. They were indistinct and blurred. He tried 
to make out their 
faces and they seemed to have no faces. Later on, he knew, he'd mourn them, but 
he could not 
mourn them now. There was not enough of them to mourn. There was no time now for 
mourning 
them; there was too much to do and to think about. A thousand years, he thought, 
and we won't be 
going back. For Ship was the only one that could take them back, and if Ship 
said it wasn't going 
back, that was the end of it. 
"The other three?" he asked. "Burial in space?" 
"No," said Nicodemus. "We found a planet where they'll rest through all 
eternity. Do you want to 
know?" 
"If you please," said Horton. 

4 
FROM the platform of the high plateau where Ship had landed, the planetary 
surface stretched 
out to distant, sharp horizons, a land with great blue glaciers of frozen 
hydrogen creeping down the 
slopes of black and barren rock. The planet's sun was so distant that it seemed 
only a slightly larger, 
brighter star--a star so dimmed by distance and by dying that it did not have a 
name or number. On 
the charts of Earth there was not even a pinprick marking its location. Its 
feeble light never had 
been registered on a photographic plate by a terrestrial telescope. 
Ship, asked Nicodemus, is this all that we can do? 
Ship said, We can do no further. 
It seems cruel to leave them here, in this place of desolation. 
We sought a place of solitude for them, said Ship, a place of dignity and 
aloneness, where 
nothing will find them and disturb them for study or display. We owe them this 
much, robot, but 
when this is done, it is all that we can give them. 
Nicodemus stood beside the triple casket, trying to fix the place forever in his 
mind, although, as 
he looked out across the planet, he realized there was little he could fix. 
There was a deadly 
sameness here; wherever one might look at it all seemed to look the same. 
Perhaps, he thought, it is 
just as well--they can lie here in their anonymity, masked by the unknownness of 
their final resting 
place. 
There was no sky. Where there should have been a sky was only the black 
nakedness of space, 
lighted by a heavy sprinkle of unfamiliar stars. When he and Ship were gone, he 
thought, for 
millennia these steely and unblinking stars would be eyes staring down at the 
three who lay within 
the casket--not guarding them, but watching them--staring with the frosty glare 
of ancient, 
moldering aristocrats regarding, with frigid disaproval, intruders from beyond 
the pale of their 
social circle. But the disapproval would not matter, Nicodemus told himself, for 
there now was 
nothing that could harm them. They were beyond all harm or help. 
He should say a prayer for them, he thought, although he'd never said a prayer 
before nor ever 

7
thought of praying. He suspected, however, that prayer by such as he might not 
be acceptable, either 
to the humans lying there or whatever deity might bend his ear to hear it. But 
it was a gesture--a 
slender and uncertain hope that somewhere there might still be an agency of 
intercession. 
And if he did pray, what could he say? Lord, we leave these creatures in your 
care-- And once he 
had said that? Once he had made a good beginning? 
You might lecture him, said Ship. You might impress upon him the importance of 
these creatures 
with whom you are concerned. Or you might plead and argue for them, who need no 
pleading and 
are beyond all argument. 
You mock me, said Nicodemus. 
We do not mock, said Ship. We are beyond all mockery. 
I should say some words, said Nicodemus. They would expect it of me. Earth would 
expect it of 
me. You were human once. I would think there'd be, on an occasion such as this, 
some humanity in 
you. 
We grieve, said Ship. We weep. We feel a sadness in us. But we grieve at death, 
not at the leaving 
of the dead in such a place. It matters not to them wherever we may leave them. 
Something should be said, Nicodemus insisted to himself. Something solemnly 
formal, some 
intonation of studied ritual, all spoken well and properly, for they'll be here 
forever, the dust of 
Earth transplanted. Despite all our logic in seeking out a loneliness for them, 
we should not leave 
them here. We should have sought a green and pleasant planet... 
There are, said Ship, no green and pleasant planets. 
Since I can find no proper words to say, said the robot to the Ship, do you mind 
if I stay awhile? 
We should at least do them the courtesy of not hurrying away. 
Stay, said Ship. We have all eternity. 
"And do you know," Nicodemus said to Horton, "I never did get around to saying, 
anything." 
Ship spoke. We have a visitor. He came out of the hills and is waiting just 
beyond the ramp. You 
should go out to meet him. But be alert and cautious and strap on your sidearms. 
He appears an 
ugly customer. 

5 
THE visitor had halted some twenty feet beyond the end of the ramp and was 
waiting for them 
when Horton and Nicodemus came out to meet him. He was human-tall and stood upon 
two legs. 
His arms, hanging limply at his side, did not end in hands, but in a nest of 
tentacles. He wore no 
clothing. His body was covered by a skimpy, molting coat of fur. That he was a 
male was 
aggressively apparent. His head appeared to be a bare skull. It was innocent of 
hair or fur, and the 
skin was tightly stretched over the structure of the bones. The jaws were heavy 
and elongated into a 
massive snout. Stabbing teeth, set in the upper jaw, protruded downward, 
somewhat like the fangs 
of the primitive saber-tooth of ancient Earth. Long, pointed ears, pasted 
against the skull, stood 
rigid, overtopping the bald, domed cranium. Each of the ears was tipped with a 
bright red tassle. 
As they reached the bottom of the ramp, the creature spoke to them in a booming 
voice. "I 
welcome you," he said, "to this asshole of a planet." 
"How the hell," blurted Horton, startled, "do you know our language?" 
"I learned it all from Shakespeare," said the creature. "Shakespeare taught it 
to me. But 
Shakespeare now is dead, and I miss him greatly. I am desolate without him." 
"But Shakespeare is a very ancient man and I do not understand ..." 
"Not an ancient one at all," the creature said, "although not really young, and 
he had a sickness in 
him. He described himself as human. He looked very much like you. I take it you 
are human, too, 
but the other is not human, although it has human aspects." 
"You are right," said Nicodemus. "I am not a human. I am the next best thing to 
human. I am a 
human's friend." 
"Then that is fine," said the creature, happily. "That is fine indeed. For I was 
that to Shakespeare. 
The best friend he ever had, he said. I surely miss the Shakespeare. I admire 
him very greatly. He 
could do many things. One thing he could not do was to learn my language. So 
perforce I must 

8
learn his. He told me about great carriers that go noisily through space. So 
when I hear you coming, 
I hurry very fast, hoping that it be some of Shakespeare's people coming." 
Horton said to Nicodemus. "There is something very wrong here. Man could not be 
this far out in 
space. Ship fooled around, of course, slowing down for planets and it took a lot 
of time. But we're 
close to a thousand light-years out..." 
"Earth by now," said Nicodemus, "may have faster ships, going many times the 
speed of light. 
Many of such ships may have overleaped us as we crawled along. So, peculiar as 
it may seem..." 
"You talk of ships," the creature said. "Shakespeare talk of them as well but he 
need no ship. 
Shakespeare come by tunnel." 
"Now, look here," said Horton, a trifle exasperated, "try to talk some sense. 
What is this tunnel 
business?" 
"You mean you do not know of tunnel that runs among the stars?" 
"I've never heard of it," said Horton. 
"Let's back up," said Nicodemus, "and try to get another start. I take it you 
are a native of this 
planet." 
"Native?" 
"Yes, native. You belong here. This is your home planet. You were born here." 
"Never," said the creature, most emphatically. "I would not urinate upon this 
planet could I avoid 
it. I would not stay a small time-unit could I get away. I came hurriedly to 
bargain outward passage 
with you when you leave." 
"You came as Shakespeare did? By tunnel?" 
"Of course, by tunnel. How otherwise I get here?" 
"Then leaving should be simple. Go to the tunnel and depart by it." 
"I cannot," the creature wailed. "The damn tunnel does not work. It has gone the 
haywire. It 
works only one way. It brings you here, but does not take you back." 
"But you said a tunnel to the stars. I gained the impression it goes to many 
stars." 
"To more than the mind can count, but here it need repair. Shakespeare try and I 
try, but we 
cannot fix it. 
Shakespeare pound upon it with his fists, he kick it with his feet, he yell at 
it, calling terrible 
names. Still it does not work." 
"If you are not of this planet," said Horton, "perhaps you'll tell us what you 
are." 
"That is simply said. I am a carnivore. You know carnivore?" 
"Yes. The eater of other forms of life." 
"I am a carnivore," the creature said, "and satisfied to be one. Proud of being 
one. There be 
among the stars those who look with disdain and horror upon carnivore. They say, 
mistakenly, it is 
not right to eat one's fellow beings. They say it be cruel to do so, but I tell 
you there is no cruelty. 
Quick death. Clean death. No suffering at all. Better than sickness and old 
age." 
"All right, then" said Nicodemus. "No need to carry on. We hold nothing against 
a carnivore." 
"Shakespeare say humans also carnivores. But not as much as me. Shakespeare 
shared the meat I 
killed. Would have killed himself, but not as good as me. I glad to kill for 
Shakespeare." 
"I bet you were," said Horton. 
"You are alone here?" asked Nicodemus. "You are the only one of your kind upon 
the planet?" 
"The only one," said Carnivore. "I arrive on sneaky trip. I tell no one of it." 
"This Shakespeare of yours," said Horton. "He was on a sneaky trip as well?" 
"There were unprincipled creatures who would have liked to find him, claiming he 
had done them 
imaginary harm. He had no wish for them to find him." 
"But Shakespeare now is dead?" 
"Oh, he's dead, all right. I ate him." 
"You what?" 
"The flesh only," said Carnivore. "Careful not to eat the bones. And I don't 
mind telling you he 
was tough and stringy and not of a flavor that I relished. He had a strange 
taste to him." 
Nicodemus spoke hastily to change the subject. "We would be glad," he said, "to 
come to the 

9
tunnel with you and see about the fixing of it." 
"Would you, in all friendship, do that?" Carnivore asked gratefully. "I was 
hoping that you 
would. You can fix the goddamn tunnel?" 
"I don't know," said Horton. "We can have a look at it. I'm not an engineer..." 
"I," said Nicodemus, "can become an engineer." 
"The hell you can," said Horton. 
"We will have a look at it," said this madman of a robot, "Then it is all 
settled?" 
"You can count on it," said Nicodemus. 
"That is good," said Carnivore. "I show you ancient city and..." 
"There is an ancient city?" 
"I speak too hugely," said Carnivore. "I let my enthusiasm at the fixing of the 
tunnel to run off 
with me. Perhaps not an actual city. Perhaps an outpost only. Very old and very 
ruined, but 
interesting, perhaps. But now I must be going. The star is riding low. Best to 
be undercover when 
darkness is come upon this place. I am glad to meet you. Glad Shakespeare's 
people come. Hail and 
farewell!! I see you in the morning and the tunnel fixed." 
He turned abruptly and trotted swiftly into the hills, without pausing to look 
back. 
Nicodemus shook his head. "There are many mysteries here," he said. "Much to 
ponder on. Many 
questions to be asked. But first I must get dinner for you. You've been out of 
cold-sleep long 
enough for it to be safe to eat. Good, substantial food, but not too much at 
first. You must curb your 
greediness. You must take it slow." 
"Now just a goddamn minute," Horton said. "You have some explaining to be done. 
Why did you 
head me off when you knew I wanted to ask about the eating of this Shakespeare, 
whoever he might 
be? What do you mean, you can become an engineer? You know damn well you can't." 

"All in good time," said Nicodemus. "There is, as you say, explaining to be 
done. But first you 
must eat, and the sun is almost set. You heard what the creature said about 
being undercover when 
the sun is gone." 
Horton snorted. "Superstition. Old wives' tales." 
"Old wives' tales or not," said Nicodemus, "it is best to be ruled by local 
custom until one is 
sure." 
Looking out across the sea of billowing grass, Horton saw that the level horizon 
had bisected the 
sun. The sweep of grass seemed to be a sheet of shimmering gold. As he watched, 
the sun sank 
deeper into the golden shimmer and as it sank, the western sky changed to a 
sickly lemon-yellow. 
"Strange light effect," he said. 
"Come on, let's get back aboard," urged Nicodemus. "What do you want to eat? 
Vichyssoise, 
perhaps--how does that sound to you? Prime ribs, a baked potato?" 
"You set a good table," Horton told him. 
"I am an accomplished chef," the robot said. 
"Is there anything you aren't? Engineer and cook. What else?" 
"Oh, many things," said Nicodemus. "I can do many things." 
The sun was gone and a purple haze seemed to be sifting down out of the sky. The 
haze hung 
over the yellow of the grass, which now had changed to the color of old, 
polished brass. The 
horizon was jet-black except for a glow of greenish light, the color of young 
leaves, where the sun 
had set. 
"It is," said Nicodemus, watching, "most pleasing to the eye." 
The color was fading rapidly, and as it faded, a chill crept across the land. 
Horton turned to go up 
the ramp. As he turned, something swooped down upon him, seizing him and holding 
him. Not 
really seizing him, for there was nothing there to seize him, but a force that 
fastened on him and 
engulfed him so he could not move. He tried to fight against it, but he could 
not move a muscle. He 
attempted to cry out, but his throat and tongue were frozen. Suddenly he was 
naked--or felt that he 
was naked, not so much deprived of clothes as of all defenses, laid open so that 
the deepest corner 
of his being was exposed .for all to see. There was a sense of being watched, of 
being examined, 
probed, and analyzed. Stripped and flayed and laid open so that the watcher 
could dig down to his 

10
last desire and his final hope. It was, said a fleeting thought inside his mind, 
as if God had come and 
was assessing him, perhaps passing judgment on him. 
He wanted to run and hide, to jerk the flayed skin back around his body and to 
hold it there, 
covering the gaping, spread-eagled thing that he had become, hiding himself 
again behind the 
tattered shreds of his humanity. But he couldn't run and there was no place to 
hide, so he continued, 
standing rigid, being watched. 
There was nothing there. Nothing had appeared. But something had seized and held 
and stripped 
him, and he tried to drive out his mind to see it, to learn what kind of thing 
it was. And as he tried to 
do this, it seemed his skull cracked open and his mind was freed, protruding and 
opening out so that 
it could encompass what no man had ever understood before. In a moment of blind 
panic, his mind 
seemed to expand to fill the universe, clutching with nimble mental fingers at 
everything within the 
confines of frozen space and flowing time and for an instant, but only an 
instant, he imagined that 
he saw deep into the core of the ultimate meaning hidden in the farthest reaches 
of the universe. 
Then his mind collapsed and his skull snapped back together, the thing let loose 
of him and, 
staggering, he reached out to grasp the railing of the ramp to hold himself 
erect. 
Nicodemus was beside him, supporting him, and his anxious voice asked, "What is 
the matter, 
Carter? What came over you?" 
Horton grasped the railing in a death grip, as if it were the one reality left 
to him. His body ached 
with tension, but his mind still retained some of its unnatural sharpness, 
although he could feel the 
sharpness fading. Helped by Nicodemus, he straightened. He shook his head and 
blinked his eyes, 
clearing his vision. The colors out on the sea of grass had changed. The purple 
haze had faded into a 
deep twilight. The brassiness of the grass had smoothed into a leaden hue, and 
the sky was black. 
As he watched, the first bright star came out. 
"What is the matter, Carter?" the robot asked again. 
"You mean you didn't feel it?" 
"Something," said Nicodemus. "Something frightening. It struck me and slid off. 
Not my body, 
but my mind. As if someone had used a mental fist and had missed the blow, 
merely brushing 
against my mind." 

6 
THE brain-that-once-had-been-a-monk was frightened, and the fright brought 
honesty. 
Confessional honesty, he thought, although never in the confessional had he ever 
been as honest as 
he was being now. 
What was that? asked the grande dame. What was that we felt? 
It was the hand of God, he told her, brushed against our brow. 
That's ridiculous, said the scientist. That is a conclusion reached without 
adequate data or 
conscientious observation. 
What then, asked the grande dame, do you make of it? 
I make nothing of it, said the scientist. I note it; that is all. A 
manifestation of some sort. From far 
out in space, perhaps. Not a product of this planet. I have the distinct 
impression that it was not of 
local origin. But until we have more data, we must make no attempt to 
characterize it. 
That's the sheerest twaddle I have ever heard, said the grande dame. Our 
colleague, the priest, 
did better. 
Not a priest, said the monk. I have told you and told you. A monk. A mere monk. 
A very piss-poor 
monk. 
And that was what he'd been, he told himself, continuing with his honest 
self-assessment. He 
never had been more. A less-than-nothing monk who had been afraid of death. Not 
the holy man 
that he had been acclaimed, but a sniveling, shivering coward who was afraid to 
die, and no man 
who was afraid of death ever could be holy. To the truly holy, death must be a 
promise of a new 
beginning, and, thinking back, he knew he never had been able to conceive of it 
as anything but an 
end and nothingness. 
For the first time, thinking thus, he was able to admit what he never had been 
able to admit 

11
before, or honest enough to admit before--that he had seized the opportunity to 
become the servant 
of science to escape the fear of death. Although he knew he had purchased only a 
deferment of his 
death, for even as the Ship, he could not escape it altogether. Or at least 
could not be certain he'd 
escape it altogether, for there was the chance--the very slightest chance--which 
the scientist and 
the grande dame had discussed centuries ago, with himself staying strictly out 
of the discussion, 
afraid to enter it, that as the millennia went on, if they survived that long, 
the three of them possibly 
could become pure mind alone. And if that should prove to be the case, he 
thought, then they could 
become, in the strictest sense, immortal and eternal. But if this did not 
happen, they still must face 
the fact of death, for the spaceship could not last forever. In time it would 
become, for one reason or 
another, a shattered, worn-out hulk adrift between the stars, and in time no 
more than dust in the 
cosmic wind. But that would not be for a long time yet, he told himself, 
grasping at the hope. The 
Ship, with any luck, might survive millions of years, and that might give the 
three of them the time 
they needed to become pure mind alone--if, in fact, it was possible to become 
pure mind alone. 
Why this overriding fear of death, he asked himself. Why this cringing from it, 
not as an ordinary 
man would cringe, but as someone who was obsessed with a repugnance against the 
very thought of 
it? Was it, perhaps, because he'd lost his faith in God, or perhaps, which was 
even worse, had 
never achieved a faith in God? And if that were the case, why had he become a 
monk? 
Having got a start with honesty, he gave himself an honest answer. He had chosen 
monking as an 
occupation (not a calling, but an occupation) because he feared not only death, 
but even life itself, 
thinking that it might be easy work which would provide him shelter against the 
world he feared. 
In one thing, however, he had been mistaken. Monking had not proved an easy 
life, but by the 
time he'd found this out, he was afraid again--afraid of admitting his mistake, 
afraid of confessing, 
even to himself, the lie that he was living. So he had gone on as a monk and in 
the course of time, in 
one way and another (more than likely by pure happenstance) had achieved a 
reputation for a piety 
and devotion that was at once the envy and the pride of all his fellow monks, 
although some of 
them, on occasion, delivered some rather unworthy snide remarks. As time went 
on, it seemed that 
somehow a great many people came to hear of him--not perhaps for anything he had 
ever done 
(for, truth to tell, he had done but little), but for the things he seemed to 
stand for, for his way of 
life. As he thought about it now, he wondered whether there had not been a 
misconception--if his 
piety may not have stemmed from his devotion, as everyone seemed to think, but 
from his very fear 
and, because of his fear, his conscious attempts at self-effacement. A trembling 
mouse, he thought, 
that became a holy mouse because of its very trembling. 
But however that might have been, he finally came to stand as a symbol for the 
Age of Faith in a 
materialistic world and one writer who had interviewed him described him as a 
medieval man 
persisting into modern times. The profile that came from the interview, 
published in a magazine of 
wide circulation and written by a perceptive man who, for dramatic effect, did 
not hesitate to gild 
the lily slightly, had provided the impetus that, after several years, had 
elevated him to greatness as 
a simple man who held the necessary insight to return to basic faith and the 
strength of soul to hold 
that faith against the inroads of humanistic thought. 
He could have been an abbot, he thought with a surge of pride; perhaps more than 
an abbot. And 
when he became aware of the pride, made no more than a token effort to quash it. 
For pride, he 
thought, pride and, finally, honesty, were all that he had left. When the abbot 
had been called to 
God, it had been made known to him, in various subtle ways, that he could 
succeed the abbot. But, 
suddenly afraid again, this time of responsibility and place, he had pleaded to 
remain with his 
simple cell and simple tasks, and because the order held him in high regard, he 
was granted his 
petition. Although, thinking of it since and now drenched in honesty, he allowed 
the suspicion that 
he had suppressed before out into the open. It was this: had his petition been 
granted not because of 
the order's high regard of him, but because the order, knowing him too well, had 
realized what a 
poor stick of an abbot he would have made? In view of the favorable publicity 
his appointment 
would have afforded because of the wide acclaim which had been accorded him, had 
the order been 
forced into a position where it had felt bound to make at least the offer? And 
had there been a 
wholehearted sigh of relief throughout the entire house when he had declined? 

12
Fear, he thought--a man hounded all his life by fear--if not a fear of death, 
then the fear of life 
itself. Maybe, after all, there had been no need of fear. Perhaps, after, all 
the fearfulness, there had 
been nothing actually to fear. It had been, more than likely, his own inadequacy 
and his lack of 
understanding that had driven him to fear. 
I am thinking like a man of flesh and bone, he told himself, not like a 
disembodied brain. The 
flesh still clings to me; the bones will not dissolve. 
The scientist was still talking. We must refrain especially, he was saying, from 
automatically 
thinking of the manifestation as something that had a mystical or a spiritual 
quality. 
It was just one of those simple things, said the grande dame, glad to get it 
settled. 
We must keep firmly in our consciousness, said the scientist, that there are no 
simple things in the 
universe. No happenings to be brushed casually to one side. There is a purpose 
in everything that 
happens. There always is a cause--you may be sure of that--and in time there 
will be effect as well. 
I wish, said the monk, I could be as positive as you are. 
I wish, said the grande dame, we hadn't landed on this planet. It is an ishy 
place. 

7 
"You must restrain yourself," Nicodemus said. "Not too much. The vichyssoise, 
one small slice 
of roast, half of the potato. You must realize that your gut has been inactive 
for hundreds of years. 
Frozen, certainly, and subject to no deterioration, but, even so, it must be 
given an opportunity to 
get into tone again. In a few days you can resume normal eating habits." 
Horton eyed the food, "Where did you get this fare?" he demanded. "Certainly it 
was not carried 
from Earth." 
"I forget," said Nicodemus. "Of course you wouldn't know. We have on board the 
most efficient 
model of a matter converter that had `been manufactured up to the time of our 
departure." 
"You mean you just shovel in some sand?" 
"Well, not exactly that. It isn't quite that simple. But you have the right 
idea." 
"Now wait a minute," said Horton. "There is something very wrong. I don't 
remember any matter 
converters. They were talking about them, of course, and there seemed some 
hope-that one could be 
put together, but to the best of my recollection . . ." 
"There are certain things, sir," said Nicodemus, rather hurriedly, "with which 
you are not 
acquainted. One of them is that once you went into cold-sleep, we did not leave 
immediately." 
"You mean there was some delay?" 
"Well, yes. As a matter of fact, quite a bit of delay." 
"For Christ's sake, don't try to be mysterious about it. How long?" 
"Well, fifty years or so." 
"Fifty years! Why fifty years? Why put us into cold-sleep and then wait fifty 
years?" 
"There was no real urgency," said Nicodemus. "The time span of the project was 
estimated to run 
over so long a time, a couple of hundred years or perhaps slightly more before a 
ship returned with 
news of habitable planets, that a delay of fifty years did not seem excessive if 
in that length of time 
it was possible to develop certain systems that would give a better chance of 
success." 
"Like a matter converter, for example." 
"Yes, that was one of the things. Not absolutely necessary, of course, but 
convenient and adding a 
certain margin. There were, more importantly, certain ship engineering features 
which, if they could 
be worked out. . ." 
"And they were worked out?" 
"Most of them," said Nicodemus. 
"They never told us there would be such delay," said Horton. "Neither us nor any 
of the other 
crews that were in training at the time. If any of the other crews had known, 
they'd gotten the word 
to us." 
"There was," said Nicodemus, "no need for you to know. There might have been 
some illogical 
objection on your part if you had been told. And it was important that the human 
crews be ready 
when the ships were set to go. You see, all of you were very special people. 
Perhaps you remember 

13
with what great care you were chosen." 
"God, yes. We were run through computers for calculations of survival factors. 
Our psychological 
profiles were measured time and time again. They damn near wore us out with 
physical testing. And 
they implanted that telepathic dingus in our brains so we could talk with Ship, 
and that was the most 
bothersome of all. I seem to recall it took months to learn how to use it 
properly. But why do all 
this, then rush us to cold storage? We could simply have stood by." 
"That could have been one approach," said Nicodemus, "with you growing older by 
the year. Not 
exactly youth, but not too great an age, was one of the factors that went into 
the selection of the 
crews. There'd be little sense in sending oldsters out. Placed in cold-sleep, 
you did not age. Time 
was not a factor to you, for in cold-sleep time is not a factor. Doing it the 
way it was done, the 
crews were standing by, their faculties and abilities undimmed by the time it 
took to get other bugs 
ironed out. The ships could have gone when you were frozen, but by waiting fifty 
years, the ships' 
chances and your chances were considerably enhanced. The life-support systems 
for the brains were 
perfected to a point that would have been thought impossible fifty years before, 
the linkage between 
brains and ship were made more efficient and sensitive and almost foolproof. The 
cold-sleep 
systems were improved." 
"I have divided feelings about it," said Horton. "However, I guess it personally 
makes no 
difference to me. If you can't live out your life in your own time, I suppose it 
becomes immaterial 
when you do live it out. What I do regret is that I am left alone. Helen and I 
had something going 
for us, and I liked the other two. I suppose, as well, there is some guilt 
because they died and I lived 
on. You say you saved my life because I was in cubicle number one. If I'd not 
been in it, one of the 
others would have lived and I would now be dead." 
"You must feel no guilt," Nicodemus told him. "If there is anyone who should 
feel the guilt, I am 
the one, but I feel no guilt, for reason tells me I was capable and performed to 
the limit of current 
technology. But you--you had no part in it. You did nothing; you shared in no 
decision." 
"Yes, I know. But, even so, I can't avoid thinking. . ." "Eat your soup," said 
Nicodemus. "The 
roast is growing cold." 
Horton had a spoonful of the soup. "It is good," he said. 
"Of course it is. I told you I can be an accomplished chef." 
"Can be," said Horton. "That's a strange way of putting it. You either are a 
chef, or you aren't. 
But you say you can be one. That was what you said about being an engineer. Not 
that you were 
one, but that you could be one. It seems to me, my friend, you can be too many 
things. A moment 
ago you implied that you were, as well, a good cold-sleep technician. 
"But the way I say it is precisely right," protested Nicodemus. "That is the way 
it is. I am a chef 
right now and can be an engineer or a mathematician or astronomer or geologist. 
. ." 
"There's no need for you to be a geologist. I'm the' geologist of this 
expedition. Helen was the 
biologist and chemist." 
"Some day," said Nicodemus, "there might be need of two geologists." 
"This is ridiculous," said Horton. "No man or no robot could be as many things 
as you say you 
are or could be. It would take years of study, and in the process of learning 
each new specialty or 
discipline, you'd lose some of the previous training you had taken. Furthermore, 
you're simply a 
service robot, not specialized at all. Let's face it, your brain capacity is 
small, and your reaction 
system is comparatively insensitive. Ship said that you were chosen deliberately 
because of your 
simplicity--because there was very little that could go wrong with you." 
"Which is all true enough," Nicodemus admitted. "I am what you say I am. A 
runner-of-errands 
and a fetcher-of-objects and good for little else. My brain capacity is small. 
But when you have two 
brains or three. . ." 
Horton threw down his spoon on the table. "You are mad!" he said. "No one has 
two brains." 
"I have," said Nicodemus calmly. "I have two brains right now--the old standard, 
stupid robot 
brain and a chef-brain and if I wanted, I could add another brain, although I do 
not know what kind 
of brain would supplement a chef-brain. A nutritionist-brain, perhaps, although 
the kit doesn't have 
that kind of brain." 

14
With an effort, Horton controlled himself. "Now let's start over," he said. 
"Let's take it from the 
top and go slow and easy so that this stupid human brain of mine can follow what 
you're saying." 
"It was those fifty years," said Nicodemus. 
"What fifty years, goddammit?" 
"Those fifty years they took after you were frozen. A lot of good research and 
development can 
be done in fifty years if a lot of humans put their minds to it. You trained, 
did you not, with a most 
accomplished robot--the finest piece of humanoid machinery that had ever been 
built." 
"Yes, we did," said Horton. "I can remember him as if it were only yesterday. . 
." 
"To you," said Nicodemus, "it would be only yesterday. The thousand years since 
then are as 
nothing to you." 
"He was a little stinker," Horton said. "He was a martinet. He knew three times 
more than we did 
and was ten times as capable. He rubbed it into us in his suave, sleek, nasty 
way. So slick about it 
you could never peg him. All of us hated the little sonofabitch." 
"There, you see," said Nicodemus triumphantly. "That could not continue. It was 
a situation that 
could not be tolerated. If he'd been sent with you, think of all the friction, 
the clash of personalities. 
That is why you have me. They couldn't use a thing like him. They had to use a 
simple, humble 
clod like me, the kind of robot you were accustomed to ordering around and who 
would not resent 
the ordering around. But a simple, humble clod like me would be incapable on his 
own to rise to the 
occasions that necessity sometimes might demand. So they hit upon the idea of 
auxiliary brains that 
could be plugged into place to supplement a cloddish brain like mine." 
"You mean you have a box full of auxiliary brains that you just plug in!" 
"Not really brains," said Nicodemus. "They are called transmogs, although I'm 
not sure why. 
Someone once told me the term was short for transmogrification. Is there such a 
word?" 
"I don't know," said Horton. 
"Well, anyhow," said Nicodemus, "I have a chef transmog and a physician transmog 
and a 
biochemist transmog--well, you get the idea. A full college course encoded in 
each of them. I 
counted them once, but now I have forgotten. A couple of dozen, I would guess." 
"So you actually might be able to fix this tunnel of the Carnivore's." 
"I wouldn't count on it," said Nicodemus. "I don't know what the engineer 
transmog contains. 
There are so many different kinds of engineering--chemical, mechanical, 
electrical." 
"At least you'll have an engineering background." 
"That's right. But the tunnel the Carnivore talked about probably wasn't built 
by humans. 
Humans wouldn't have had the time ..." 
"It could be human-built. They've had almost a thousand years to do a lot of 
things. Remember 
what the fifty years you've been talking about accomplished." 
"Yeah, I know. You could be right. Relying on ships might not have been good 
enough. If the 
humans had relied on ships, they wouldn't have gotten out this far by now 
and..." 
"They could have if they developed faster-than-light. Maybe once you develop 
that, there would 
be no natural limit. Once you break the light barrier, there might be no limit 
to how much faster 
than light you could go." 
"Somehow I don't think they developed faster-than-light ships," said Nicodemus. 
"I listened to a 
lot of talk about it during that period after I was drafted into this project. 
No one seemed to have 
any real starting point, no real appreciation of what is involved. What more 
than likely happened is 
that humans landed on a planet not nearly as far out as we are now and found one 
of the tunnels and 
are now using the tunnels." 
"But not only humans." 
"No, that's quite apparent from Carnivore. How many other races may be using 
them we can 
have no idea. What about Carnivore? If we don't get the tunnel operating, he'll 
want to ship with 
us." 
"Over my dead body." 
"You know, I feel pretty much the same. He's a rather uncouth personage and it 
might be quite a 
problem to put him into cold-sleep. Before we tried that, we'd have to know his 
body chemistry." 

15
"Which reminds' me that we're not going back to Earth. What is the scoop? Where 
does Ship 
intend to go?" 
"I wouldn't know," said Nicodemus. "We talked off and on, of course. Ship, I am 
sure, tried to 
hold nothing back from me. I have the feeling Ship doesn't quite know itself 
what it intends to do. 
Just go, I suppose, and see what it can find. You realize, of course, that Ship, 
if it wishes to, can 
listen in on anything we say." 
"That doesn't bother me," said Horton. "As it stands, we're all tied up in the 
same can of worms. 
You for much longer than will be the case with me. Whatever the situation, I 
suppose I'll have to 
stand upon it, for I have no other base. I'm close to a thousand years away from 
home, and a 
thousand years behind the Earth of this moment. Ship undoubtedly is right in 
saying that if I went 
back I would be a misfit. You can accept all of this intellectually, of course, 
but it gives you a 
strange feeling in the gizzard. If the other three were here, I imagine it would 
be different. I have the 
sense of being horribly alone." 
"You aren't alone," said Nicodemus. "You have Ship and me." 
"Yes, I suppose so. I seem to keep forgetting." 
He pushed back from the table. "That was a fine dinner," he said. "I wish you 
could have eaten 
with me. Before I go off to bed, do you think it would disaccommodate my gut if 
I had a slice of 
that roast, cold?" 
"For breakfast," said Nicodemus. "If you want a slice for breakfast." 
"All right, then," said Horton. "There's still one thing that bothers me. With 
the setup that you 
have, you don't really need a human on this expedition. At the time I took the 
training, a human 
crew made sense. But not any longer. You and Ship could do the job alone. Given 
the situation as it 
is, why didn't they just junk us? Why did they bother putting us on board?" 
"You seek to mortify yourself and the human race," said Nicodemus. "It is no 
more than shock 
reaction to what you have just learned. To start with, the idea was to put 
knowledge and technology 
on board, and the only way it could be put on board was in the persons of humans 
who had that 
knowledge and technology. By the time the ships took off, however, another means 
of supplying 
technology and knowledge had been found in the transmogs which could make even 
such simple 
robots as myself into multispecialists. But even so there would be, in us, still 
one factor lacking--
that strange quality of humanness, the biological human condition which we still 
lack and which no 
roboticist has as yet been able to build into us. You spoke of your training 
robot and your hatred of 
him. This is what happens when you go beyond a certain point in robotic 
improvement. You gain 
good capability, but the humanity to balance the capability is lacking and the 
robot, instead of 
becoming more humanlike, becomes arrogant and insufferable. It may always be so. 
Humanity may 
be a factor that cannot be arrived at artificially. An expedition to the stars, 
I suppose, could function 
efficiently with only robots and their transmog kits aboard, but it would not be 
a human expedition, 
and that is what this and the other expeditions were all about--to seek out 
planets where the people 
of Earth could live. Certainly the robots could make observations and reach 
decisions and nine 
times out of ten the observations would be accurate and the decisions quite 
correct, but in that tenth 
time, one or both could be wrong because the robots would be looking at the 
problem with robotic 
eyes and making the decisions with robotic brains that lacked that all important 
factor of the human 
quality." 
"Your words are comforting," said Horton. "I only hope you are right." 
"Believe me, sir, I am." 
Ship said, Horton, you'd better get to bed now. The Carnivore will be coming to 
meet you in the 
morning and you should get some sleep. 

8 
BUT sleep came hard. 
Lying on his back, staring up into the blackness, the strangeness and the 
loneliness came pouring 
in upon him, the strangeness and the loneliness that had been held off till now. 

Only yesterday, Nicodemus had said to him. It was only yesterday that you went 
into cold-sleep, 

16
because all the centuries that have come and gone since then mean less than 
nothing to you. 
It had been, he thought, with some surprise and bitterness, only yesterday. And 
now alone, to 
remember and to mourn. To mourn, here in the darkness of a planet far from 
Earth, arrived at, so far 
as he was concerned, in the twinkling of an eye, to find the home planet and the 
people of that 
yesterday sunk in the depths of time. 
Helen dead, he thought. Dead and lying underneath the steely glitter of stranger 
stars on an 
unknown planet of an unrecorded sun, where the glaciers of frozen oxygen reared 
their bulk against 
the black of space and the primal rock lay uneroded through millennia piled upon 
millennia, a 
planet as unchanging as was death itself. 
The three of them together--Helen, Mary, Tom. Only he was missing--missing 
because he had 
been in cubicle number one, because a stupid, flat-footed, oafish robot could 
think of no other 
system than doing a task by numbers. 
Ship, he whispered in his mind. 
Go to sleep, said Ship. 
To hell with you, said Horton. You can't baby me. You can't tell me what to do. 
Go to sleep, you 
say. Take a leak, you say. Forget it all, you say. 
We do not tell you to forget, said Ship. The memory is a precious one, and while 
you must mourn, 
hold the memory fast. When you mourn, know that we mourn with you. For we 
remember Earth as 
well. 
But you won't go back to it. You plan to go on. After this planet, you plan to 
go on. What do you 
expect to find? What are you looking for? 
There is no way of knowing. We have no expectations. 
And l go with you? 
Of course, said Ship. We are a company, and you are part of it. 
The planes? We'll take time to look it over? 
There is no hurry, said Ship. We have all the time there is. 
What we felt this evening? That's a part of it? A part of this unknown that 
we're going to? 
Good night, Carter Horton, said Ship. We will talk again. Think of pleasant 
things and try to go 
to sleep. 
Pleasant things, he thought. Yes, there had been pleasantness back where the sky 
was blue, with 
white clouds floating in it, with a picture-ocean running its long fingers up 
and down a picture-
beach, with Helen's body whiter than the sands they lay upon. There had been 
picnic fires with the 
night-wind moving through the half-seen trees. There had been candlelight upon a 
snow-white 
cloth, with gleaming china and sparkling glass set upon the table, with music in 
the background and 
contentment everywhere. 
Somewhere in the outer darkness, Nicodemus moved clumsily about, trying to be 
quiet, and 
through the open port came a far-off strident fiddling of what he told himself 
were insects. If there 
were insects here, he thought. 
He tried to think of the planet that lay beyond the port, but it seemed he could 
not think of it. It 
was too new and strange for him to think of it. But he found that he could 
conjure up the frightening 
concept of that vast, silent depth of space that lay between this place and 
Earth, and he saw in his 
mind's eye the tiny mote of Ship floating through that awesome immensity of 
nothingness. The 
nothingness translated into loneliness, and with a groan, he turned over and 
clutched the pillow tight 
about his head. 

9 
CARNIVORE showed up shortly after morning light. 
"Good," he said. "You're ready. We travel in no hurry. Is not far to go. I 
checked the tunnel 
before I left. It had not fixed itself." 
He led the way, up the sharp pitch of the hill, then down into a valley that lay 
so deep between the 
hills and was so engulfed in forest that the darkness of the night had not been 
dispelled entirely. The 
trees stood tall, with few branches for the first thirty feet or so, and Carter 
noted that while in 

17
general structure they were much like the trees of Earth, the bark tended to 
have a scaly appearance 
and the leaves mostly merged toward black and purple rather than to green. 
Underneath the trees, 
the forest floor was fairly open, with only an occasional scattering of spindly 
and fragile shrubs. At 
times, tiny skittering creatures scampered across the ground, which was littered 
with many fallen 
branches, but at no time did Carter manage to get a good look at them. 
Here and there rock outcroppings thrust out of the hillside and when they 
descended another hill 
and crossed a small but brawling stream, low cliffs rose on the opposite bank. 
Carnivore led the 
way to where a path went up through a break in the wall of rock and they 
scrambled up the steep 
incline. Carter noted that the cliffs were pegmatite. There was no sign of 
sedimentary strata. 
They scrambled up the cleft and emerged on a hill that rose to another ridge, 
higher than the other 
two they had crossed. At the top, a scatter of boulders and a low ledge of rock 
outcropping ran 
along the ridge. Carnivore sat down upon a slab of stone and patted a place 
beside him, inviting 
Horton to sit. 
"Here we pause and catch the breath," he said. "The land is rugged hereabouts." 
"How much farther?" Carter asked. 
Carnivore waved a nest of tentacles that served him, as a hand. "Two more 
hills," he said, "and 
we are almost there. Did you, by the way, catch god-hour last night?" 
"God-hour?" 
"Shakespeare called it that. Something reaching down and touching. Like someone 
being there." 
"Yes," said Horton, "we caught it. Can you tell us what it is?" 
"I do not know," said Carnivore, "and I do not like it. It look inside of you. 
It lay you open to the 
gut. That's why I left you so abruptly. It jitters me. It turns me into water. 
But I stayed too long. It 
caught me going home." 
"You mean you knew that it was coming?" 
"It comes every day. Or almost every day. There are times, not for very long, 
when it may not 
come at all. It moves across the day. It is coming now of evenings. It comes 
each time just a 
fraction later. It walks across the day and night. It keeps changing of its 
hour, but the change is very 
small." 
"It's been coming all the time you've been here?" 
"All the time," said Carnivore. "It does not leave one be." 
"You have no idea what it is?" 
"Shakespeare said it something out of space. He said it works like something far 
in space. It 
comes when this point of planet that we stand upon faces some point far in 
space." 
Nicodemus had been prowling along the ledge of rock, stooping now and then to 
pick up a fallen 
chunk of stone. Now he came stalking toward them, holding out several small 
stones in his hand. 
"Emeralds," he said. "Weathered out and lying on the ground. There are others in 
the matrix." 
He handed them to Horton. Horton looked closely at them, holding them in the 
palm of his hand, 
probing at them with an index finger. 
Leaning over, Carnivore had a look at them. "Pretty rocks," he said. 
"Hell, no," said Horton. "More than pretty rocks. These are emeralds." He looked 
up at 
Nicodemus. "How did you know?" he asked. 
"I am wearing my rockhound transmog," said the robot. "I put in my engineering 
transmog and 
there was room for one more, so I put in the rockhound..." 
"Rockhound transmog! What the hell are you doing with a rockhound transmog?" 
"Each of us," Nicodemus said sedately, "was allowed to include one hobby 
transmog. For our 
own personal gratification. There were stamp transmogs and chess transmogs and a 
lot of others, 
but I thought a rockhound transmog..." 
Horton pushed about the emeralds. "You say there are others?" 
"I would suggest," said Nicodemus, "that we have a fortune here. An emerald 
mine." 
Carnivore rumbled, "What do you mean, a fortune?" 
"He is right," said Horton. "This entire hill could be an emerald mine." 
"There pretty rocks have value?" 

18
"Among my people, a great deal of value." 
"I never heard the like," said Carnivore. "Mad to me it sounds." He gestured 
with contempt at the 
emeralds. "Only pretty rocks, pleasing to the eye. But what to do with them?" 
He rose slowly. "We go on," he said. 
"All right, we'll go on," said Horton. He handed the emeralds to Nicodemus. 
"But we should look around. . ." 
"Later," Horton said. "They'll still be here." 
"We'll need a survey, so that Earth . . ." 
"Earth is no longer a consideration for any of us," said Horton. "You and Ship 
made that clear. 
No matter what happens, no matter what we find, Ship's not going back." 
"You speak incomprehensible to me," said Carnivore. 
"Forgive us," Horton told him. "It is a small private joke. Not worthy of 
explaining." 
They went on down the hill and across another valley, then up another hill. This 
time there were 
no rest pauses. The sun rose higher and dispelled some of the forest gloom. The 
day grew warm. 
Carnivore slouched along at a ground-gaining pace which seemed easy for him, 
with Horton 
puffing along behind him and Nicodemus bringing up the rear. Watching him, 
Horton tried to make 
up his mind what kind of creature Carnivore might be. He was a slob, of 
course--there was no 
doubt of that--but a vicious, killing slob that could be dangerous. He seemed 
friendly enough with 
his continual chatter about his old friend Shakespeare, but he would bear 
watching. So far he had 
given no indication of other than bluff good humor. There was no question that 
the affection he held 
for the human, Shakespeare, had been anything but genuine, although his talk of 
eating Shakespeare 
still rankled. His non-recognition of the value of emeralds was a puzzling 
factor. It seemed 
impossible that any culture should fail to recognize the value of gemstones, 
unless it were a culture 
which had no concept of adornment. 
From the last hill they had climbed, they went down, not into a valley, but into 
a cuplike 
depression rimmed by hills. Carnivore stopped so suddenly that Horton, walking 
behind him, 
bumped into him. 
"There it be," said Carnivore, pointing. "You can see it from here. We almost 
are upon it." 
Horton looked where he was pointing. He could see nothing but the forest. 
"That white thing?" asked Nicodemus. 
"That is it," said Carnivore, delighted. "That is it, the whiteness of it. I 
keep it clean and white, 
scrubbing off the tiny plants that essay to grow upon it, washing off the dust. 
Shakespeare called it 
Grecian. Can you tell me, sir or robot, what a Grecian is? I inquire of 
Shakespeare, but he only 
laugh and shake his head and say too long a story. I think at times he does not 
know himself. He 
only used a word he heard." 
"Grecian comes from a human folk called Greeks," said Horton. "They achieved a 
greatness 
many centuries ago. A building built as they once built is called Grecian. It is 
a very general term. 
There are many factors to Grecian architecture." 
"Simply built," said Carnivore. "Wall and roof and door. That is all it is. Good 
habitat to live in, 
though. Tight to wind and rain: Do you not see it yet?" 
Horton shook his head. "Soon you will," said Carnivore. "We be there very 
quickly." 
They went on down the slope and at the bottom of it, Carnivore stopped again. He 
pointed to a 
path. "That way to home," he said. "That way, step or two, to spring. You want 
good drink of 
water?" 
"I would," said Horton. "That was a strenuous hike. Not too far, but all up and 
down." 
The spring gushed out of the hillside into a rock-rimmed pool, the water 
escaping from the pool 
to go trickling away in a tiny stream. - 
"You go ahead of me," said Carnivore. "You are guest of mine. Shakespeare said 
guests all go 
first. I was guest of Shakespeare. He was here ahead of me." 
Horton knelt, and bracing his hands, lowered his head to drink. The water was so 
cold that it 
seemed to burn his throat. Sitting up, he squatted on his heels while Carnivore 
dropped to his four 
feet, lowered his head and drank--not really drinking, but lapping up the water 
as a cat would do. 

19
For the first time, squatting there, Horton really saw and appreciated the 
somber beauty of the 
forest. The trees were thick and, even in the full sunlight, dark. While the 
trees were not conifers, 
the forest reminded him of the dark pine forests in the northlands of the Earth. 
Growing around the 
spring and extending up the slope down which they had come were clumps of 
shrubs, three feet or 
so in height, all blood-red in color. He could not recall that he had seen, 
anywhere, a single flower 
or blossom. He made a mental note to ask about that later. 
Halfway up the path, Horton finally saw the building that Carnivore had 
attempted to point out to 
him. It stood upon a knoll in a small clearing. It did have a Grecian look about 
it, although he had 
no background on Grecian or any other type of architecture. Small and 
constructed of white stone, 
its lines were severe and simple, but somehow it seemed to have a boxlike 
appearance. There was 
no portico, no fanciness at all--just four walls, an unadorned door, and a 
gable, not too high, with 
very little pitch. 
"Shakespeare lived there when I come," said Carnivore. "I settled in with him. 
We spend happy 
time here. Planet is tail-end of nowhere, but happy comes inside you." 
They crossed the clearing and came up to the building, walking three abreast. 
When they were a 
few feet from it, Horton glanced up and saw something he had missed before, the 
bleached 
whiteness of it lost in the whiteness of the stone. He stopped dead in horror. 
Affixed above the door 
was a human skull, grinning down at them. 
Carnivore saw him staring at it. "Shakespeare bids us welcome," he said. "That 
is Shakespeare's 
skull." 
Staring in fascination and horror, Horton saw that Shakespeare had two missing 
front teeth. 
"Hard it was to fasten Shakespeare up there," Carnivore was saying~ "Bad place 
to put him, for 
bone soon weather and be gone, but that was what he asked. Skull above the door, 
he told me, 
bones hung in sacks inside. I do it as he ask me, but it was sorrowful task. I 
do it with no liking, but 
a sense of duty and of friendship." 
"Shakespeare asked you to do this?" 
"Yes, of course. You think I did it on my own?" 
"I don't know what to think." 
"Way of death," he said. "Eat him even as he dies. Priestly function, he 
explained. I do it as he 
say. I promise not to gag, and I do not gag. I harden me and eat him, bad as he 
might taste, down to 
last scrap of gristle. I polish off his bones meticulously until none but bone 
remain. More than I 
want to eat. Belly full to bursting, but I keep on eating, never stopping until 
he all is gone. I do it 
right and proper. I do it with all holiness. I do not shame my friend. I was 
only friend he had." 
"It could be," said Nicodemus. "The human race can come up with some peculiar 
notions. One 
friend ingesting another friend as a gesture of respect. Among prehistoric 
people, there was ritual 
cannibalism--doing a true friend or a great man a special honor by the eating of 
him." 
"But that was prehistoric," Horton objected. "I never heard of a modern race..." 

"A thousand years," said Nicodemus, "since we were upon the Earth. Plenty of 
time for the 
development of very strange beliefs. Maybe those prehistoric people knew 
something that we 
didn't. Maybe there was a logic to ritualistic cannibalism, and that logic was 
rediscovered in the last 
thousand years or so. Twisted logic, probably, but with appealing factors." 
"You say," Carnivore asked, "that your race do not do this? I do not 
understand." 
"A thousand years ago they didn't, but perhaps they do it now..." 
"Thousand years ago?" 
"We left Earth a thousand years ago. Perhaps a great deal more than a thousand 
years ago. We do 
not know the mathematics of time dilation. It could be a lot more than a 
thousand years." 
"But no human lives a thousand years." 
"True, but I was in cold-sleep. My body was frozen." 
"Frozen and you die." 
"Not the way we did it. Someday I'll explain." 
"You think not ill of me for the eating of the Shakespeare?" 
"No, of course we don't," said Nicodemus. 

20
"That is well," said Carnivore, "for if you did you would not take me with you 
when you leave. 
Dearest wish I have is to get off this planet as soon as possible." 
"We may be able to fix the tunnel," said Nicodemus. "If we are able to, you can 
leave by tunnel." 

10 
THE tunnel was a ten-foot square of mirrored blackness set into the face of a 
small dome of rock 
which thrust itself upward out of the underlying rock a short distance down the 
hill from the 
Grecian building. Between the building and the dome of rock ran a path worn down 
to rock and 
even, it seemed, worn into the very rock. There had been, at some time in the 
past, heavy traffic 
there. 
Carnivore gestured at the mirrored blackness. "When it is working," he said, "it 
is not black, but 
shiny white. You walk into it, and on second step somewhere else you are. Now 
you walk into it 
and it shove you back. You cannot approach it. There is nothing there, but the 
nothing shove you 
back." 
"But when it takes you somewhere," asked Horton, "when it's working, I mean, and 
will take you 
somewhere, how do you know where it is about to take you?" 
"You don't," said Carnivore. "At one time, maybe, you say where you want to go, 
but not now. 
That machinery over there," he waved his arm, "that panel set beside the 
tunnel--it is possible, at 
one time, with it you could select your destination, but no one knows now how it 
operates. But it 
makes small difference, really. If you do not like the place you get to, you 
step back into it again 
and go other-where. You always, after many times, perhaps, find some place that 
you like. For me, 
I'd be happy to go anywhere from here." 
"That doesn't sound quite right," said Nicodemus. 
"Of course it's not," said Horton. "The entire system must be out of kilter. No 
one in their right 
mind would build a nonselective transportation system. This way it could take 
you centuries to 
reach your destination--if you ever reached it." 
"Very good," said Carnivore, placidly, "for being on the dodge. No one--not even 
self--knows 
where you will wind up. Maybe if pursuer sees you ducking into tunnel and ducks 
in after you, it 
may not take him to same place as you." 
"You know this, or are you just guessing?" 
"Guessing, I suppose. How is one to know?" 
"The entire system's haywire," said Nicodemus, "if it works at random. You do 
not travel in it. 
You play a game with it, and the tunnel always wins." 
"But this one takes you nowhere," wailed Carnivore. "I'm not picky where I 
go--anywhere but 
here. My fervent hope is that you can fix it so it takes me anywhere." 
"I would suspect," said Horton, "that it was built millennia ago and has, for 
centuries, been 
abandoned by the ones who built it. Without proper maintenance, it has broken 
down." 
"But that is not the point," protested Carnivore. "Point is, can you fix it?" 
Nicodemus had moved over to the panel set into the rock beside the tunnel. "I 
don't know," he 
said. "I can't even read the instruments, if they are instruments. Some of them 
look like 
manipulative gadgets, but I can't be sure." 
"It wouldn't harm to try and see what happens," Horton said. "You can't make the 
situation 
worse." 
"But I can't," said Nicodemus. "I can't even reach them. There seems to be some 
sort of force 
field. Paper thin, perhaps, I can put my fingers on the instruments, or rather I 
think I have my 
fingers on them, but there's no contact. I don't really touch them. I can feel 
them underneath my 
fingers, but I'm not in actual contact with them. It is as if they were coated 
with a slippery grease." 
He held up one hand and looked closely at it. "But there's not any grease," he 
said. 
"The damn thing works one way," bawled Carnivore. "It should work two ways." 
"Keep your shirt on," said Nicodemus shortly. 
"You think you can do something with it?" asked Horton. "There's a force field 
there, you said. 
You could get yourself blown up. Do you know anything about force fields?" 

21
"Not a thing," said Nicodemus cheerfully. "I didn't even know there could be 
such a thing. I just 
called it that. The term popped into my head. I don't know what it is." 
He set down the toolbox he'd been carrying and knelt to open it. He began laying 
out tools on the 
rocky path. 
"You got things to fix him with," crowed Carnivore. "Shakespeare had no tools. I 
have no 
goddamn tools, he'd say." 
"A fat lot of good they'd done him even if he had them," said Nicodemus. "Even 
if you have 
them, you have to know how to use them." 
"And you know how?" asked Horton. 
"You're damn right I do'," said Nicodemus. "I'm wearing this engineering 
transmog." 
"Engineers don't use tools. It's mechanics who use tools." 
"Don't bug me," said Nicodemus. "At the sight and feel of tools, it all falls 
into place." 
"I can't bear to watch this," said Horton. "I think that I will leave. 
Carnivore, you spoke of a 
ruined city. Lets have a look at it." 
Carnivore fidgeted; "But if he should need some help. Someone to hand him tools, 
perhaps. If he 
needs moral support. . ." 
"I'll need more than moral support," said the robot. "I'll need great chunks of 
luck, and some 
divine intervention wouldn't hurt at all: Go and see your city." 

11 
BY no stretch of the imagination was it a city. No more than a couple of dozen 
buildings, none of 
them large. They were oblong stone structures and had the look of barracks. The 
site lay half a mile 
or so from the building to which Shakespeare's skull was fastened, and stood on 
a slight rise of 
ground above a stagnant pond. Heavy brush and a scattering of trees had grown up 
between the 
buildings. In several instances, trees encroaching against the walls or corners 
of a building had 
dislodged or shifted some of the masonry. While most of the buildings were 
engulfed in the heavy 
growth, paths wandered here and there. 
"Shakespeare chopped out the paths," said Carnivore. "He explored here and 
brought a few things 
home. Not much, only something now and then. Something that caught his fancy. He 
say we not 
disturb the dead." 
"Dead?" asked Horton. 
"Well, maybe too dramatic I make it sound. The gone, then, those who went away. 
Although that 
does not sound right either. How can one disturb those who have gone away?" 
"The buildings all look alike," said Horton. "They look to me like barracks." 
"Barracks is a word I do not have." 
"A place to house a number of people." 
"House? To live in?" 
"That is right. At one time a number of people lived here. A trading post, 
perhaps. Barracks and 
warehouses." 
"No one here to trade with." 
"Well, okay, then--trappers, hunters, miners. There are the emeralds Nicodemus 
found. This 
place may be packed with gem-bearing formations or gravels. Or fur-bearing 
animals. . ." 
"No fur-bearers," said Carnivore, positively. "Meat animals, that is all. Some 
low-grade 
predators. Nothing we must fear." 
Despite the whiteness of the stone of which the buildings had been constructed, 
they gave the 
impression of dinginess, as if the buildings were no more than shacks. At the 
time they had been 
built, it was quite apparent that a clearing had been made, for despite the 
trees that had crept into the 
erstwhile clearing, the heavier forest still stood back. But, even with the 
sense of dinginess, there 
was a feel of solidity in the structures. 
"They built to last," said Horton. "It was a permanent settlement of some sort, 
or intended to be 
permanent. It's strange that the building you and Shakespeare used was set apart 
from all the others. 
It could, I suppose, have been a guardhouse to keep an eye on the tunnel. Have 
you investigated 

22
these buildings?" 
"Not me," said Carnivore. "They repel me. There is nastiness about them. 
Unsafeness. To enter 
one of them islike entering a trap. Close up on me, I would expect it, so I 
could not get out. 
Shakespeare poked around in them, to my nervousness. He bring a few small 
objects out of which 
he was fascinated. Although, as I tell you, he disturb but little. He said it 
should be left for others of 
his kind who knew such things." 
"Archaeologists." 
"That's the word I search for. It escape my tongue. Shakespeare said shameful 
thing to mess up 
for archaeologists. They learn much from it where he learn nothing." 
"But you said . . ." 
"A few small objects only. Easy to the hand. Small, he said, to carry and 
perhaps of value. He say 
you must not spit in the eye of fortune." 
"What did Shakespeare think this place might be?" 
"He had many thoughts about it. Mostly, he wonders after heavy thought, if it 
not be place for 
malefactors." 
"You mean a penal colony." 
"He did not, to my remembrance, use the word you say. But he speculate a place 
to keep those not 
wanted other-where. He figure maybe tunnel never meant to operate but one way. 
Never two-way, 
always one-way tunnel. So those sent here never could go back." 
"It makes sense," said Horton. "Although it wouldn't have to be. If the tunnel 
were abandoned in 
the ancient past, it would have been a long time without maintenance and would 
progressively have 
broken down. What you say about not knowing where you're going when you enter a 
tunnel and 
two people entering it and winding up at different destinations sounds wrong, 
too. A haphazard 
transportation system is impractical. Under a condition such as that, it seems 
unlikely the tunnel 
would have been widely used. What I can't understand is why people such as you 
and Shakespeare 
should have used the tunnels." 
"Tunnels only used," Carnivore said blithely, "by those who do not give a damn. 
Only by those 
who have no really choice. Go to places that make no sense to go to. All planet 
tunnels lead to are 
planets you can live on. Air to breathe. Not too hot, too cold. Not kind of 
places that kill you dead. 
But many worthless places. Many places where there is no one, maybe never been 
anyone." 
"The people who built the tunnels must have had a reason to go to so many 
planets, even to those 
planets you call worthless. It would be interesting to find out their reasons." 
"Only ones can tell you," said Carnivore, "are the ones who fabricate the 
tunnels. They gone. 
They somewhere else or nowhere at all. No one knows who they were or where to 
look for them." 
"But some of the tunnel worlds are inhabited. Inhabited by people, I mean." 
"Is so if definition of people is a very broad one and not too fussy. On many 
tunnel planets, 
trouble can come fast. Last one I was on, next to this, trouble comes not only 
fast, but big." 
They had been walking slowly down the paths that wound among the buildings. 
Ahead of them 
the heavy underbrush closed in to obliterate the path. The path ended just 
beyond a door that opened 
into one of the structures. 
"I'm going in," said Horton. "If you don't want to, wait outside for me." 
"I'll wait," said Carnivore. "Inside of them makes a crawling on my spine, a 
jumping in my 
belly." 
The inside of the place was dark. There was a dampness and a mustiness in the 
air and a chill that 
struck to the bone. Tensed, Horton felt the urge to leave, to duck back into 
sunlight once again. 
There was an alienness here that could be felt, but not defined--the feeling of 
being in a place 
where he had no right to be, a sense of intruding on something that should be 
kept darkly hidden. 
Consciously planting his feet firmly, he stayed, although he felt the beginning 
of shivers up and 
down his back. Gradually his eyes grew accustomed to the gloom and he could make 
out shapes. 
Against the wall to his right stood what could be nothing else but a wooden 
cupboard. It was rickety 
with age. Horton had the feeling that if it were bumped, it would come tumbling 
down. The doors 
were held dosed by wooden buttons. Beside the cupboard stood a wooden 
four-legged bench with 

23
great cracks running across its top. On the bench stood a piece of pottery--a 
water jug, perhaps, 
with a triangular piece broken from the rim. On the opposite end stood what 
looked like a vase. It 
certainly wasn't pottery. It looked like glass, but the layer of fine dust that 
covered everything made 
it impossible to tell with any surety. And beside the bench stood what had to be 
a chair. There were 
four legs, a seat, a slanted back. Hanging on one of the uprights of the back 
was a piece of fabric 
that could have been a hat. On the floor in front of the chair lay what seemed 
to be a plate--an oval 
of ceramic whiteness, and upon the plate, a bone. 
Something, Horton told himself, had sat in the chair-- how many years ago?--with 
a plate upon 
its lap, eating a joint of meat, perhaps holding the joint in its hands, or 
whatever served it for hands, 
chewing off the bone, with the water jug close at hand, although perhaps not 
water, but a jug of 
wine. And having finished with the joint, or eaten all it wanted of it, had 
placed the plate upon the 
floor, perhaps, as it did so, settling back and patting the fullness of its 
belly with some satisfaction. 
Putting the plate with the joint upon it down upon the floor, but then never 
coming back to pick up 
the plate. With no one ever coming back to pick up the plate. 
He stood in fascination, staring at the bench, the chair, the plate. Some of the 
alienness seemed to 
have gone away, for here was a set piece snatched out of the past of a people 
who, whatever may 
have been their shape, held some of the elements of a common humanity that might 
extend 
throughout the universe. A midnight snack, perhaps--and what had happened once 
the midnight 
snack were eaten? 
The chair to sit in, the bench to hold the jug, the plate to hold the joint--and 
the vase, what about 
the vase? It consisted of a globular body, a long neck, and a broad base for 
sitting. More like a 
bottle than a vase, he thought. 
He stepped forward and reached out for it and as he reached brushed against the 
hat, if it were a 
hat, that hung upon the chair. At his touch, the hat disintegrated. It 
disappeared in a small puff of 
dust that floated in the air. 
His hand grasped the vase or bottle and he lifted it and saw that the globular 
body of it was 
incised with pictures and symbols. Holding it by the neck, he brought it close 
up to his face so that 
he could see the decorations. 
A strange creature stood within an enclosure that had a peaked roof with a 
little ball on top the 
roof. It looked for all the world, he thought, as if the creature stood inside a 
kitchen canister that 
might be used for storing tea. And the creature--was it humanoid or simply an 
animal standing on 
two sticklike hind legs? It had only one arm and it bore a heavy tail which 
extended at an upward 
angle to its upright body. The head was a blob, but extending upward and outward 
from it were six 
straight lines; three to the left, two to the right and one extending straight 
upward. 
Twirling the bottle (or the vase?), other etchings came into view--horizontal 
lines formed within 
two lines, one above the other and seemingly attached to one another by vertical 
lines. Buildings, he 
wondered, with the vertical lines representing pillars supporting the roof? 
There were many 
squiggles and lopsided ovals and some irregular markings in short rows that 
could have been words 
in an unknown language. And what could have been a tower, from the top of which 
emerged three 
figures that had the look of foxes snatched from some old legend out of Earth. 
From the path outside, Carnivore was calling to him, "Horton, all goes well with 
you?" 
"Very well," said Horton. 
"I apprehensive for you," said Carnivore. "Please, will you not come out? You 
make me nervous

staying." 
"All right," said Horton, "since it makes you nervous." He turned about and went 
out the door, 
still carrying the bottle. 
"You find a receptacle of interest," said Carnivore, eyeing it with some 
misgiving. 
"Yes, look here." Horton lifted the bottle, turning it slowly. "Representations 
of some sort of life, 
although I'm hard put to tell exactly what they are:" 
"Shakespeare found a couple similar. With markings on them also, but not exact 
as yours. He also 
puzzled hard over what they were." 
"They could be representations of the people who lived here." 

24
"Shakespeare said the same, but qualified his saying to their being only myths 
of people who were 
here. He explain that myths are racial rememberings, things that memory, often 
faulty, says 
happened in the past." He fidgeted nervously. "Leave us return," he said. "My 
belly growls for 
nourishment." 
"And so does mine," said Horton. 
"I have meat. Killed only yesterday. You will join me at my meat?" 
"Most gladly," Horton said. "I have rations, but not as good as meat." 
"Meat is not as yet too high," said Carnivore. "But I kill again tomorrow. Like 
meat on the fresh 
side. Eat it high only in emergency. I suppose you subject your meat to fire, 
same as Shakespeare 
did." 
"Yes, I like it cooked." 
"Dry wood there is in plenty for the fire. Stacked outside the house and waiting 
for the blaze. 
Have a hearth for fire out front. I suppose you saw it." 
"Yes, I saw the hearth." 
"The other. Does he eat meat as well?" 
"He does not eat at all." 
"Unbelievable," said Carnivore. "How does he keep his strength?" 
"He has what you call a battery. It supplies him food of a different sort." 
"You think this Nicodemus not fix tunnel right away? Back there, you seem to be 
saying that." 
"I think it might take a while," said Horton. "He has no idea what it is about 
and neither of us can 
help him." 
They went back along the winding path they'd followed. "What is that smell?" 
asked Horton. 
"Like something dead, or worse." 
"It is the pond," said Carnivore. "The pond you must have noticed." 
"I saw it coming in." 
"It smell most obnoxiously," said Carnivore. "Shakespeare call it Stinking 
Pond." 

12 
HORTON squatted before the fire, superintending the cut of meat roasting over 
the coals. 
Carnivore sat across the fire from him, tearing with his teeth at the slab of 
raw meat he held. Blood 
smeared his muzzle and ran down his face. 
"You do not mind?" he asked. "My stomach aches exceedingly for filling." 
"Not at all," said Horton. "Mine will be just a minute more." 
The sun of late afternoon was warm against his back. The heat of the fire beat 
against his face and 
he found himself exulting in the comfort of the camp. The fire was placed 
directly in front of the 
snow-white building, with Shakespeare's skull grinning down upon them. Heard in 
the silence was 
the gurgle of the stream that ran below the spring. 
"Once we are done," said Carnivore, "I show to you the possessions of the 
Shakespeare. I have 
them all neatly bagged. You have interest in them?" 
"Yes, of course," said Horton. 
"In many ways," said Carnivore, "the Shakespeare was an aggravating human, 
although I like him 
dearly. I never really knew if he liked me or not - although I think he did. We 
got along together. 
We work very well together. We talk a lot together. We tell each other many 
things. But I never can 
erase the feeling he was laughing at me, although why he should I do not 
understand. Do you find 
me funny, Horton?" 
"Not in the least," said Horton. "You must have imagined." 
"Can you tell me what goddamn means? The Shakespeare always using it and I fall 
into habit 
with him. But I never knew what it means. I ask him what is it and he would not 
tell. He only laugh 
at me, deep inside himself." 
"It has no real meaning. Ordinarily, I mean. It is used for emphasis, with no 
real import of 
meaning. It is a saying only. Most people do not use it habitually. Only some of 
them. Others use it 
sparingly and only under emotional provocation." 

25
"It means nothing then. Only way of speaking." 
"That is right," said Horton. 
"When I talk of magic, he call it goddamn foolishness. It does not mean, then, 
any special kind of 
foolishness." 
"No, he just meant foolishness." 
"You think magic foolishness?" 
"I am not prepared to say. I guess I've never thought too much about it. I would 
suggest that 
magic lightly used might be foolishness. Perhaps magic is something no one 
understands. Do you 
have faith in magic? Do you practice magic?" 
"My people have great magic through the years. Sometimes it works, sometimes 
not. I say to the 
Shakespeare let us put our magic together, maybe it will work to open up the 
tunnel. Shakespeare 
then say magic goddamn foolishness. He said that he had none. He said no such 
thing as magic." 
"I suspect," said Horton, "that he spoke from prejudice. You can't condemn 
something you know 
nothing of." 
"Yes," said Carnivore, "the Shakespeare would do a thing like that. Although I 
think he lied to 
me. I think he used his magic. He had a thing that he called book, he said it 
Shakespeare book. It 
could talk to him. What is that but magic?" 
"We call it reading," Horton said. 
"He held the book and it talked to him. Then he talked to it. He makes little 
marks upon it with a 
special stick he have. I ask him what he do and he grunt at me. He was always 
grunting at me. 
Grunt meant leave him be, do not pester him." 
"You have this book of his?" 
"I'll show it to you later." 
The steak was done, and Horton fell to eating. 
"This is good," he said. "What kind of animal?" 
"Not too big," said Carnivore. "Not hard to kill. Does not try to fight. Get 
away is all. But 
toothsome. Many animals for meat, but this one most tasty of them all." 
Nicodemus came stumping up the path, toolbox clutched in hand. He sat down 
beside Horton. 
"Before you ask," he said, "I haven't got it fixed." 
"But progress made?" asked Carnivore. 
"I don't know," said Nicodemus. "I think I know how I may be able to get the 
force field 
disconnected, although I can't be sure. It is worth at least a try. Mostly I've 
been trying to figure out 
what's behind that force field. I drew all sorts of sketches and I tried some 
diagramming to gain an 
understanding of what it's all about. I have some ideas there, as well, but it 
all goes for nothing if I 
can't get the force shield off. And I may be wrong, of course, about 
everything." 
"Not discouraged though?" 
"No, I'll keep on trying." 
"That is good," said Carnivore. 
He swallowed the last hunk of his dripping gob of meat. 
"I go down to spring," he said, "and wash my face. I am sloppy eater. You wish I 
wait for you?" 
"No," said Horton. "I'll go down a little later. I still have eaten only half 
the steak." 
"You excuse me, please," said Carnivore, getting to his feet. The other two sat 
watching him as he 
went loping down the trail. 
"How did it go?" asked Nicodemus. 
Horton shrugged. "There's a deserted village of sorts just east of here. Stone 
buildings overgrown 
with brush. No one's been there for centuries, from the looks of it. Nothing to 
show why they might 
have been here, or why they might have left. Carnivore says Shakespeare thinks 
it may have been a 
penal colony. If so, a neat way of doing it. With the tunnel inoperative, 
there'd be no need to fret 
about escapes." 
"Does Carnivore know what kind of people?" 
"He doesn't know. I don't think he cares. He has no real curiosity. The here and 
now is all that 
interests him. Besides, he's afraid of it. The past seems to terrify him. My 
guess is they were 

26
humanoids--not necessarily people as we think of them. I went into one of the 
buildings and found 
some kind of bottle. Thought it was a vase at first, but I guess it is a 
bottle." 
He reached down beside him and handed the bottle to Nicodemus. The robot turned 
it over and 
over in his hands. 
"Crude," he said. "The pictures may be only approximately representational. Hard 
to tell what 
they represent. Some of this stuff looks like writing." 
· Horton nodded. "All true, but it means they had some idea of art. That could 
argue a culture on 
the move." 
"Not good enough," said Nicodemus, "to account for the sophisticated technology 
of the tunnels." 
"I didn't mean to imply these were the people who built the tunnels." 
"Has Carnivore said anything further about joining us when we leave?" 
"No. Apparently he is confident you can fix the tunnel." 
"Perhaps it's best not to tell him, but I'm not. I never saw such a mess as that 
control panel." 
Carnivore came waddling up the path. 
"All clean now," he said. "I see you're finished. How did you like the meat?" 
"It was excellent," said Horton. 
"Tomorrow we'll have fresh meat." 
"We'll bury the meat left over while you are on the hunt," said Horton. 
"No need to bury it. Dump it in the pond. Holding nose most securely in process 
of doing it." 
"That's what you've been doing with it?" 
"Sure," said Carnivore. "Easy way to do it. Something in the pond that eats it 
up. Probably glad I 
throw it meat." 
"You ever see this thing that eats the meat?" 
"No, but meat is gone. Meat floats in water. Meat thrown in pond never floats. 
Must be eaten." 
"Maybe your meat is what makes the pond stink." 
"Not so," said Carnivore. "Always stink like that. Even before the throwing of 
the meat. The 
Shakespeare here before me and he was throwing of no meat. Yet he said it stinks 
from the time he 
come." 
"Stagnant water can smell pretty bad," said Horton, "but I never smelled it this 
bad." 
"It may not be really water," said Carnivore. "It is thicker than water. Runs 
like water, looks like 
water, but not as thin as water. Shakespeare called it soup." 
Long shadows, extending from the stand of trees to the west, had crept across 
the camp. Carnivore 
cocked his head, squinting at the sun. 
"The god-hour is almost here," he said. "Leave us go inside. Beneath a stout 
stone roof it is not 
too bad. Not like in the open. Still feel it, but stone filters out the worst." 
The interior of the Shakespeare house was simple. The floor was paved with slabs 
of stone. There 
was no ceiling; the single room was open to the roof. In the center of the room 
stood a large stone 
table and around the room ran a chair-high ledge of stone. 
Carnivore gestured at it. "For sitting and for sleeping. Also place to put 
things." 
The ledge in the rear of the room was crowded with jars and vases, weird pieces 
of what seemed 
to be small statuary, and other pieces for which, at first glance, there seemed 
to be no name. 
"From the city," said Carnivore. "Objects that Shakespeare brought back from the 
city. Curious, 
perhaps, but of value slight." 
A misshapen candle stood on one end of the table, stuck to the stone by its own 
drippings. "It 
gives the light," said Carnivore. "Shakespeare fashioned it of fat of the meat I 
killed so he could use 
it to pore over book--sometimes it talking to him, sometimes, with his magic 
stick, he talking back 
to it..." 
"This was the book," asked Horton, "that you told me I could see." 
"Most certainly," said Carnivore. "You may, perhaps, explain it to me. Tell me 
what it is. I ask 
the Shakespeare many times but the explanation that he gave me was no really 
explanation. I sit and 
eat my heart out to know and he would never tell. But tell me one thing, please. 
Why did he need a 
light to talk with book?" 

27
"It's called reading," Horton said. "The book talks by the marks upon it. You 
must have light to 
see the marks. For it to talk, the marks must be plainly seen." 
Carnivore shook his head. "Strange goings-on," he said. "You humans are strange 
business. The 
Shakespeare strange. He always laughing at me. Not outside laughter, inside 
laughter. I like him, 
but he laugh. He makes laughter so he be better than I am. He laugh most 
secretly, but he lets me 
know he laughs." 
He strode to a corner and picked up a bag fashioned out of an animal skin. He 
hoisted it in one fist 
and shook it and a dry rustling and scraping came out of it. 
"His bones!" he shouted. "He laughs now only with his bones. Even the bones 
still laugh. Listen 
and you hear them." 
He shook the bag viciously. "Do you not hear the laughter?" 
The god-hour struck. 
It still was a monstrous thing. Despite the thick stone walls and the ceiling, 
its force was not 
greatly diminished. Once again, Horton found himself seized and laid bare and 
open, to be explored 
and this time, it seemed, more than explored, but absorbed as well, so that it 
seemed, even as he 
struggled to remain himself, he became one with whatever it was that had seized 
upon him. He felt 
the fusing with it, the becoming part of it and when he knew there was no way to 
fight against the 
fusing, tried despite his humiliation at being made a part of something else to 
do some probing of 
his own and thus find out what it was he was being made a part of. For an 
instant he thought he 
knew; for a single, fleeting instant, the thing that he had been absorbed by, 
the thing that he had 
become, seemed to reach out to take in the universe, everything that ever had 
been, or was, or 
would be, showing it to him, showing him the logic, or the non-logic, the 
purpose, the reason and 
the goal. But in that instant of knowing, his human mind rebelled against the 
implication of the 
knowing, aghast and outraged that there could be such a thing as this, that the 
showing of the 
universe and the understanding of it might be possible. His mind and body 
wilted, preferring not to 
know. 
How long it lasted he had no way of gauging. He hung limply in the grasp of it 
and it seemed to 
absorb not only him but his sense of time as well--as if it could manipulate 
time in its own fashion 
and for its own purposes, and he had a fleeting thought that if it could do 
this, there might be 
nothing that could stand against it, since time was the most elusive factor in 
the universe. 
Finally it was over, and Horton was surprised to find himself crouched upon the 
floor, his arms up 
to cover his head. He felt Nicodemus lifting him, putting him on his feet and 
holding him erect. In 
anger at his helplessness, he struck the robot's hands away and staggered to the 
great stone table, 
clutching at it desperately. 
"It was bad again," said Nicodemus. 
Horton shook his head, trying to clear his brain. "Bad," he said. "As bad as it 
was before. And 
you?" 
"The same as before," said Nicodemus. "A glancing mental blow was all. It works 
its will more 
harshly upon a biologic brain." 
Through a fog, Horton heard Carnivore declaiming. "Something up there," he was 
saying, "seems 
interested in us." 

18 
HORTON opened the book to the title page. Beside his elbow the homemade candle 
guttered 
smokily, throwing a flickering and uncertain light. He bent close to read. The 
typeface was 
unfamiliar, and the words seemed wrong. 
"What is it?" Nicodemus asked. 
"I think it's Shakespeare," Horton told him. "What else could it be? But the 
spelling is all 
different. Strange abbreviations. And some of the letters wrong. Yes, look 
here--that would be it. 
The Complete Works of William Shakespeare. That's how I make it out. Do you 
agree with me?" 
"But there's no publication date," said Nicodemus, leaning over Horton's 
shoulder. 
"After our time, I would imagine," Horton said. "Language and spelling change as 
time goes on. 

28
No date, but published at--can you make out the word?" 
Nicodemus bent his head closer. "London. No, not London. Someplace else. No 
place I ever 
heard of. Maybe not on Earth." 
"Well, we know it's Shakespeare, anyhow," said Horton. "That's how come his 
name. He meant 
it as a joke." 
Carnivore grumbled at them from across the table. "The Shakespeare full of 
jokes." 
Horton turned the page, to a blank page filled with crabbed pencil script. He 
bent above the page, 
puzzling it out. It was composed, he saw, of the same odd spelling and word 
arrangement that he'd 
found on the title page. Tortuously, he made out the first few lines, 
translating them almost as he 
would have a foreign language: 

If you are reading this, there is a probability you may have fallen in with that 
great monster, 
Carnivore. If such should be the case, don't, for an instant, trust the 
miserable sonofabitch. I know 
he intends to kill me, but I shall have the last laugh on him. The last laugh is 
an easy thing for one 
who knows that, in any case, he is about to die. The inhibitor I carried with me 
is all but gone by 
now, and once I have no more of it, the malignancy will continue to eat into my 
brain. And I am 
convinced, before the final killing pain sets in, it would be an easier death 
for this slobbering 
monster to kill me than it would be to die in pain . . 

"What does it say?" asked Nicodemus. 
"I'm not sure," said Horton. "I have difficulty with it." 
He pushed the book aside. 
"He talked to book," said Carnivore, "with his magic stick. He never tell me 
what he said. You 
cannot tell me, either?" 
Horton shook his head. 
"Able you should be," insisted Carnivore. "You human just like he. What one says 
with stick-
marks the other one should know." 
"It's the time factor," said Horton. "We've been upon our way at least a 
thousand years to reach 
here. Perhaps a great deal more than a thousand years. In a thousand years or 
less there would be 
many changes in the symbols that the marking stick would make. Also his 
inscription of the 
symbols are not of the best. He writes a shaky hand." 
"You will try again? Great curiosity to know what the Shakespeare say, 
especially what he say of 
me." 
"I will keep on trying," Horton said. 
He pulled the book back in front of him. 

die in pain. He pretends great friendship for me, and he carries his role so 
well that it requires 
considerable analytical effort to discern his actual attitude. To arrive at an 
understanding of him, 
one must first learn what kind of thing he is and gain an acquaintance of his 
background and his 
motivation. It was only slowly that I came to a realization that he is, in 
truth, what he seems to be 
and what he boasts he is--not only a confirmed carnivore, but a predator as 
well. Killing is not 
only a way of life for him; it is a passion and religion. Not he alone, but his 
very culture, is based 
upon the art of killing. Bit by bit I have been able, through a deep insight 
gained from living with 
him, to piece together the story of his life and background. If you should ask 
him, I should 
imagine that he would tell you, proudly, he is of a warrior race. But that does 
not tell the entire 
story. He is, among his race, a very special creature, by his own light perhaps 
a legendary hero--
or at least about to become a legendary hero. Hislife profession, as I 
understand it (and I am sure 
my understanding is correct), is to travel world to world and on each world 
challenge and kill the 
most deadly species that has evolved upon it. In the manner of the legendary 
North American 
Indians of Old Earth, he counts symbolic coup for each adversary that he kills 
and, as I understand 
it, he now is runner-up in the entire history of his race and yearns most 
worthily to become the all-
time champion, the greatest killer of them all. What this will gain him I'm not 
certain, but can 

29
only speculate--perhaps the immortality of racial memory, being enshrined 
forever in his tribal 
pantheon... 

"Well?" asked Carnivore. 
"Yes?" 
"The book now talks to you. You move the finger, line by tine." 
"Nothing," said Horton. "Really nothing. Mostly prayers and incantations." 
"I knew it," rasped Carnivore. "I knew it. He say my magic goddamn foolishness, 
and yet he 
practice of his own. He does not mention me? You sure he does not mention me?" 
"Not yet. Perhaps a little farther on." 

But in this abomination of a planet he is trapped with me. He is barred, as I 
am, from those 
other worlds wherein he could seek out and battle and destroy, to the eternal 
glory of his race, the 
most puissant life-forms he can ferret out. In consequence, I am sure I can 
detect in the great 
warrior mentality of him a quietly growing desperation, and I feel certain that 
the time will come 
when all hope is gone of other worlds, that he will make me the last name on his 
victory roll; 
although, God knows, the killing of me will be small credit to him, for I would 
be hopelessly 
outmatched. By indirection, I have done my best to impress upon him, in many 
subtle ways, what 
a frail and feeble opponent I would be. In my weakness, I had thought, lay my 
only hope. But now 
I know I am wrong. I can see the madness and the desperation grow upon him. If 
it goes on, I 
know one day he will kill me. At that time when his madness serves to magnify me 
into a foeman 
worthy of him, he'll have at me. Just what this will profit him, I do not know. 
It would seem there 
would be little point in killing when others of his race will not, cannot, know 
of it. But I somehow 
gain the impression, from what I do not know, that even in his present situation 
of being lost 
among the stars, the killing would be known and celebrated by others of his 
race. This is far 
beyond my understanding, and I have given up trying for an understanding of it. 
He sits across the table from me as I write and I can see him measuring me, 
knowing full well, 
of course, that I am no worthy subject of his ritualistic killing pattern, but 
still trying to psych 
himself into believing that I am. Someday he will do it, and that will be the 
day. But I have him 
beat hands down. I have an ace tucked up my sleeve. He does not know that within 
me lies a 
death that has only a short time now to run. I shall be ripe to die before he is 
ready for the killing. 
And since he is a sentimental slob--all killers are sentimental slobs--I shall 
talk him into killing 
me as a priestly office, for the performance of which I turn to him in my 
greatest need as the only 
one who can perform this deed of ultimate compassion. So I shall do two things: 
I shall use him to 
cut short the final agony which I know must come, and I shall rob him of his 
final killing since 
killing done in mercy will not count for him. He shall not count coup upon me. 
Rather, I'll count 
coup on him. And as he kills me, mercifully, I shall laugh full in his face. For 
laughter is the final 
victory. Killing for him, laughter for me. This is the measurement between us. 

Horton lifted his head and sat in stunned silence. The man was mad, he told 
himself. Mad, with a 
cold, icy, congealed madness that was far worse than raving madness. Not mere 
madness of the 
mind, but madness of the soul. 
"So," said Carnivore, "he finally mentioned me." 
"Yes. He said you are a sentimental slob." 
"That do not sound so good." 
"It is," said Horton, "a term of great affection." 
"You are sure of that?" asked Carnivore. 
"Very sure," said Horton. 
"Then the Shakespeare really loved me." 
"I am certain that he did," said Horton. 
He went back to the book, rifling through the pages. Richard III. The Comedy of 
Errors. The 
Taming of the Shrew. King John. Twelfth Night. Othello, King Lear, Hamlet. They 
all were there. 

30
And scribbled on the margins, inscribed on the partially blank pages where plays 
came to an end, 
was the crabbed writing. 
"He talked to it a lot," said Carnivore. "Almost every night. Sometimes on rainy 
days when we 
stayed inside." 
All's Well That Ends Well, page 1038, scribbled on the left-hand margin: 

The pond stinks the worst today I've ever smelled it. It is an evil smell. Not 
just a bad smell, but 
an evil smell. As if it were alive, exuding evil. As if it hid in its depth some 
obscenity. 

King Lear, page 1143, the right-hand margin this time: 

I found emeralds, weathered out of a ledge a mile or so below the spring. Just 
lying there, 
waiting to be picked up I filled my pockets with them. I don't know why I 
bothered. Here I am, a 
rich man, and it doesn't mean a thing... 

Macbeth, page 1207, bottom margin: 

There is something in the houses. Something to be found. A riddle to be 
answered. I don't know 
what it is, but I feel it there. 

Pericles, page 1381, on the lower half of the page left blank as the text came 
to an end: 

We all are lost in the immensity of the universe. Having lost our home, we have 
no place to go 
or, what is worse, too many places to go. We are lost not only in the depths of 
our universe, but in 
the depths of our minds as well. When men stayed on one planet, they knew where 
they were. 
They had yardsticks for measurement and thumbs to test the weather. But now, 
even when we 
think we know where we are, we still are lost; for there is either no path to 
lead us home, or, in 
many cases, we have no home to which it is worth our while returning. 
No matter where home may be, men today, at least intellectually, are footloose 
wanderers. Even 
though we may call a planet `home,' even the few who still remain who can call 
the Earth their 
home, there is now no such thing as home. The human race now is fragmented to 
the stars, still 
scattering to the stars. We, as a race, are impatient with the past, and many of 
us with the present 
and we have only one direction, futureward, which takes us ever farther from the 
concept of 
home. As a race, we are incurable wanderers and we want nothing that will tie us 
down and 
nothing to hang onto--until that day which must come at some time to each of us, 
when we 
realize we're not as free as we think we are, but, rather, lost. It is only when 
we try to recall, with 
our racial memory, where we've been and why we've been there, that we realize 
the full measure 
of our lostness. 
On one planet, or even in a single solar system, we could orient ourselves at 
the psychological 
center of the universe. For we had values then, values that we now see were 
limited, but at least 
values that provided a human framework within which we moved and lived. But that 
framework 
now is shattered, and our values have been splintered so many times by the 
different worlds we 
have trod upon (for each new world would give us either new values or negate 
some of the old 
ones to which we'd clung) that we have no basis upon which to form and exercise 
our judgments. 
We now have no scale upon which we can agree to delineate our losses or our 
aspirations. Even 
infinity and eternity have become concepts that differ in certain important 
ways. Once we used 
our science to structure the place in which we lived, to give it shape and 
reason; now we are 
confused because we have learned so much (although only a little of what there 
is to learn) that 
we cannot bring human scientific viewpoints to bear upon the universe as we see 
it now. We have 
more questions now than we ever had before, and less chance of finding answers. 
Provincial we 
may have been; there is no one who will deny that. But it must occur to many of 
us that in 
provincialism we found a comfort and a certain sense of safety. All life is set 
within an 

31
environment that is far greater than life itself, but given a few million years 
any kind of life can 
gain from its environment enough familiarity that it can live with its 
surroundings. But we, in 
leaving Earth, in spurning the planet of our birth for brighter, farther stars, 
have enlarged our 
environment enormously, and we do not have those few million years; in our haste 
we have no 
time at all. 

The writing came to an end. Horton closed the book and shoved it to one side. 
"Well?" asked Carnivore. 
"Nothing," Horton said. "Just endless incantations. I do not understand them." 

14 
HORTON lay beside the fire, wrapped in his sleeping bag. Nicodemus moved about, 
putting more 
wood on the fire, his dark metal hide shot with glints of red and blue from the 
flicker of the flames. 
Above, the unfamiliar stars gleamed brightly, and down by the spring, something 
was complaining 
bitterly. 
Horton settled himself more comfortably, feeling sleep stealing in upon him. He 
closed his eyes, 
not too tightly, and settled down to wait. 
Carter Horton, said Ship, speaking in his mind. 
Yes, said Horton. 
I sense an intelligence, said Ship. 
Carnivore? asked Nicodemus, crouched beside the fire. 
No, not Carnivore. We would know Carnivore, having encountered him before. His 
intelligence 
pattern is not exceptional, is not greatly different from ours. This one is. 
Stronger and more keen, 
sharper, and somehow very different, but fuzzed and indistinct. As if it is an 
intelligence that is 
trying to stay hidden and escape attention. 
Nearby? asked Horton. 
Nearby. Close to where you are. 
There is nothing here, said Horton. The settlement is deserted. We've seen 
nothing all day long. 
If it were in hiding, you would not see it. You must remain alert. The pond, 
perhaps, said Horton. 
There may be something living in the pond. Carnivore seems to think there is. He 
thinks it eats the 
meat he throws into the pond. 
Perhaps, said Ship. We seem to remember Carnivore saying the pond was not really 
water, more 
like soup. You've not been near it? 
It stinks, said Horton. One does not go near it. 
We cannot pinpoint the intelligence, said Ship, except that we know it's in your 
general area. Not 
too far away. Perhaps hidden. Take no chances. You wear your sidearms? 
Yes, of course we do, said Nicodemus. 
That is good, said Ship. Stay watchful. 
All right, said Horton. Good night, Ship. 
Not yet, said Ship. There is one other thing. When you read the book, we tried 
to follow you~ but 
could not make out all of what you read. This Shakespeare--Carnivore's friend, 
not the ancient 
playwright--what about him? 
A human, said Horton. There can't be any doubt of that. His skull, at least, is 
human and his 
writing seems to be authentic human writing. But there was a madness in him. 
Perhaps engendered 
by malignancy, a brain tumor, more than likely. He wrote of an inhibitor, a 
cancer inhibitor, I 
suppose, but said he was running out of it and knew that once he did, he would 
die in terrible pain. 
That's' why he tricked Carnivore into killing him, laughing all the while. 
Laughing? 
He laughed all the time at Carnivore. Letting Carnivore know he was laughing at 
him. Carnivore 
speaks of it often. He was deeply hurt by ii and it weighs upon his mind. I 
thought at first that this 
Shakespeare was a smart-ass--you know, someone with an inferiority complex which 
demanded 
that somehow, at no danger to himself, he must continually feed his ego. One way 
to do that is to 

32
engage in secret laughter at others, bearing out the fiction of a self-conceived 
and illusory 
superiority. I thought that at first, I say. Now I think the man was mad. He was 
suspicious of 
Carnivore. He thought Carnivore was about to kill him. Convinced that Carnivore 
would finally do 
him in. 
And Carnivore? What do you think? 
He's all right, said Horton. There's no great harm in him, 
Nicodemus, what do you think? 
I agree with Carter. He's no threat to us. I been meaning to tell you--we found 
an emerald mine. 
We know, said Ship. Note has been made of it. Although we suspect there'll be 
nothing come of it. 
We are not now concerned with emerald mines. Although, once this is done, it 
might do no harm to 
bring back a bucketful of them. No one knows. They might, somewhere, sometime 
come in handy. 
We'll do that, Nicodemus said. 
And now, said Ship, good night, Carter Horton. Nicodemus, you keep good watch 
while he sleeps. 
I intend to, said Nicodemus. 
Good night, Ship, said Horton. 

15 
NICODEMUS shook Horton awake. "We have a visitor." 
Horton reared upright out of the sleeping bag. He rubbed his sleep-smeared eyes 
to be sure of 
what he saw. A woman stood off a pace or two, close beside the fire; She wore a 
pair of yellow 
shorts and white boots that reached halfway to her knees. She had on nothing 
else. A deep red rose 
was tattooed on one naked breast. She stood tall and had a willowy look about 
her. Strapped about 
her waist was a belt that supported a weird sort of handgun. A knapsack was 
slung across one 
shoulder. 
"She came walking up the path," said Nicodemus. 
The sun was not up yet, but the first dawn light had come. There was a wet, 
wispy, soft quality to 
the morning. 
"You came up the path," said Horton, speaking fuzzily, still only half-awake. 
"Does that mean 
you came through the tunnel?" 
She clapped her hands in pleasure. "How wonderful," she said. "You speak the 
elder tongue as 
well. How delightful to find the two of you. I studied your speech, but until 
now have never had a 
chance to use it. As I suspected, I realize now that the pronunciation we were 
taught had lost 
something through the years. I was astonished, and gratified as well, when the 
robot spoke it, but I 
could not hope that I'd find others. . . 
"It's passing strange, this thing she says," said Nicodemus. "Carnivore speaks 
the same tongue, 
and he learned it from Shakespeare." 
"Shakespeare," said the woman. "Shakespeare was an ancient... 
Nicodemus jerked a thumb upward toward the skull. "Meet Shakespeare," he said, 
"or what is left 
of him." 
She looked in the direction of his thumb. She clapped her hands again. "How 
charmingly 
barbaric!" 
"Yes, isn't it?" said Horton. 
Her face was thin to the point of boniness, but it was of an aristocratic cast. 
Her silver hair was 
skinned back from her face into a little topknot on the nape of her neck. The 
skinning back of the 
hair served to emphasize the boniness of her face. Her eyes were piercing blue 
and her lips were 
thin, with no color in them and without a trace of smile. Even when she had 
clapped her hands in 
joy, there had not been a smile. Horton found himself wondering if a smile was 
possible for her. 
"You travel in strange company," she said to Horton. 
Horton looked around. Carnivore was emerging from the doorway. He looked like an 
unmade 
bed. He stretched, thrusting his arms far above his head. He yawned, his fangs 
gleaming in full 
splendor. 
"I'll get breakfast," said Nicodemus. "Are you hungry, ma'am?" 

33
"Ravenous," she said. 
"Meat we have," said Carnivore, "although not freshly killed. I make haste to 
welcome you to our 
small encampment. I am Carnivore." 
"But a carnivore is a thing," she objected. "A classification. It is not a 
name." 
"He is a carnivore and proud of it," said Horton. "That's what he calls 
himself." 
"Shakespeare name me it," said Carnivore. "I hold another name, but it is not 
important." 
"My name is Elayne," she said, "and I am glad to meet you." 
"My name is Horton," said Horton. "Carter Horton. You may call me either one or 
both." 
He crawled out of the sleeping bag and got to his feet. "Carnivore said `meat,' 
" she said. "Could 
he be talking about flesh?" 
"That's what he means," said Horton. 
Carnivore thumped his chest. "Meat is good for you," he said. "It gives you 
blood and bone. It 
tones up the muscles." 
She shuddered delicately. "Meat is all you have?" 
"We could manage something else," said Horton. "Food that we packed in. 
Dehydrated, mostly. 
Not the best to taste." 
"Oh, the hell with it," she said. "I'll eat meat with you. It is only prejudice 
that has kept me from 
it all these years." 
Nicodemus, who had gone into the Shakespeare house, now came out of it. He held 
a knife in one 
hand and a slab of meat in the other. He cut off a large chunk of the meat and 
handed it to 
Carnivore. Carnivore squatted on his heels and began tearing at the meat, blood 
running down his 
muzzle. Horton saw the look of horror on her face. "We'll cook ours," he said. 
He walked over to a 
pile of firewood and sat down upon it, patting a place beside him. "Join me," he 
said. "Nicodemus 
will do the cooking. It will take a while." He said to Nicodemus, "You'd better 
cook hers well. I'll 
take mine rare." 
"I'll start hers first," said Nicodemus. 
Hesitantly, she came over to the woodpile and sat down next to Horton. 
"This," she said, "is the strangest situation I have ever encountered. A man and 
his robot talking 
the elder tongue. A carnivore who talks it as well, and a human skull nailed 
above a doorway. The 
two of you must be from one of the backwoods planets." 
"No," said Horton. "We come straight from Earth." 
"But that can't be," she said. "No one now is straight from Earth. And I doubt 
that even there they 
speak the elder tongue." 
"But we are. We left Earth in the year. . ." 
"No one has left Earth for more than a thousand years," she said. "Earth now has 
no base for far 
traveling. Look, how fast were you traveling?" 
"At near light-speed. With a few stops here and there." 
"And you? You were, perhaps, in sleep?" 
"Of course, I was in sleep." 
"At near the speed of light," she said, "there is no way to calculate. I know 
there were early 
calculations, mathematical calculations, but they were, at best, rough 
approximations, and the 
human race did not travel at the speed of light for a sufficient length of time 
to arrive at any true 
determination of the time dilation effect. Only a few interstellar ships 
traveling at the speed of light 
or less were sent out, and fewer of them returned. Before they did return, there 
were better systems 
for far traveling and, in the meantime, Old Earth had stumbled into a 
catastrophic economic col-
lapse and a war situation--not a single, all-engulfing war, but many mean little 
wars--and in the 
process, Earth's civilization was virtually destroyed. Old Earth is still there. 
Its remaining 
population may be climbing back again. No one seems to know; no one really 
cares; no one ever 
goes back to Old Earth. I can see you know nothing of all this." 
Horton shook his head. "Nothing." 
"That means you were on one of the early light-ships." 
"One of the first," said Horton. "In 2455. Or thereabouts. Maybe the first of 
the twenty-sixth 

34
century. I don't really know. We were put into cold-sleep; then there was a 
delay." 
"You were put on standby." 
"I guess that's what you'd call it." 
"We aren't absolutely sure," she said, "but we think this is the year 4784. 
There is no certainty, 
really. Somehow history got all bollixed up. Human history, that is. There are a 
lot of other histories 
than Earth history. There was a time of confusion. There was an era of 
outpouring into space. Once 
there was a reasonable way to get into space, no one who could afford the going 
stayed on Earth. It 
required no great analytical ability to see what was happening to Earth. No one 
wanted to be caught 
in the crunch. For a great many years, there were not too many records. Those 
that did exist may 
have been erroneous; others were lost. As you might imagine, the human race 
passed through crisis 
after crisis. Not only on Earth, but in space as well. Not all the colonies 
survived. Some survived, 
but later failed, for one reason or another, to establish contact with other 
colonies, so were 
considered lost. Some still are lost--either lost or dead. The people went out 
into space in all 
directions--most of them without any actual plans, hoping that in time they'd 
find a planet where 
they could settle. They went out not only into space, but into time as well, and 
no one understood 
time factors. We still don't. Under those conditions, it would be easy to gain a 
century or two or 
lose a century or two. So don't ask me to swear what year it is. And history. 
That is even worse. We 
don't have history; we have legend. Some of the legend probably is history, but 
we can't be sure 
which is history and which is not." 
"And you came here by tunnel?" 
"Yes. I am a member of a team that is mapping the tunnels." 
Horton looked at Nicodemus, who was crouched beside the fire, watching the 
cooking steaks. 
"Did you tell her?" Horton asked. 
"I never had a chance," said Nicodemus. "She never gave me a chance. She was so 
excited about 
me talking what she called the `elder tongue.'" 
"Tell me what?" asked Elayne. 
"The tunnel's closed. It's inoperative." 
"But it brought me here." 
"It brought you here. It won't take you back. It's out of order. It works only 
one way." 
"But that's impossible. There is a control panel." 
"I know about the control panel," Nicodemus told her. "I'm working on it. Trying 
to fix it." 
"And how are you doing?" 
"Not too well," said Nicodemus. 
"We are trapped," said Carnivore, "unless the goddamn tunnel can be fixed." 
"Maybe I can help," said Elayne. 
"If you can," said Carnivore, "I implore you do your utmost. Hope I had that if 
tunnel not fixed, I 
could join ship with Horton and the robot, but I think it over and it does not 
seem so. This sleep you 
talk about, this freezing frightens me. Have no wish to be frozen." 
"We have worried about that," Horton told him. "Nicodemus knows about the 
freezing. He has a 
sleep-technician transmog. But he only knows how to freeze humans. You might be 
different--a 
different body chemistry. We have no way to determine your body chemistry." 
"So that is out," said Carnivore. "So tunnel must be fixed." 
Horton said to Elayne, "You don't seem too upset." 
"Oh, I suppose I am," she said. "But my people do not rail against fate. We 
accept life as it comes. 
Good and bad. We know there will be each." 
Carnivore, finished eating, reared up, scrubbing at his bloodied muzzle with his 
hands. "I go 
hunting now," he said. "Bring home fresh meat." 
"Wait until we've eaten," suggested Horton, "and I'll go along with you." 
"Best not," said Carnivore. "You scare the game away." 
He started walking off, then turned around. "One thing you can do," he said. 
"You can throw old 
meat in pond. But hold your nose while doing." 
"I'll manage it," said Horton. 

35
"So good," said Carnivore, and went stalking off, eastward along the path to the 
abandoned 
settlement. 
"How did you fall in with him?" asked Elayne. "And what, actually, is he?" 
"He was waiting for us when we landed," said Horton. "We don't know what he is. 
He said that 
he was trapped here, along with Shakespeare. . 
"Shakespeare, from his skull, is human." 
"Yes, but we know little more of him than we do of Carnivore. Although we may be 
able to learn 
more. He carried a volume of the complete Shakespeare, and he filled the book 
with writing, 
scribbling on the margins and end papers. Every place where there was white 
space left." 
"You have read some of this scribbling?" 
"Some of it. There's a lot yet to read." 
"The meat is done," said Nicodemus. "There is only the one plate and the one set 
of silver. You 
will not mind, Carter, if I give them to the lady?" 
"Not at all," said Horton. "I am handy with my hands." 
"Okay, then," said Nicodemus. "I'm off to the tunnel." 
"As soon as I have eaten," said Elayne, "I'll drop by to see how you're getting 
on." 
"I wish you would," said the robot. "I can't make head nor tail of it." 
"It's fairly simple," said Elayne. "There are two panels, one smaller than the 
other. The small one 
controls the shield over the larger panel, the control panel." 
"There's not two panels," said Nicodemus. 
"There should be." 
"Well, there's not. There is just the one with the force shield over it." 
"That means, then," said Elayne, "that it's not a mere malfunction. Someone 
closed the tunnel." 
"The thought had been in my mind," said Horton. "A closed world. But why should 
it be closed?" 
"I hope," said Nicodemus, "that we don't find out." He picked up his tool kit 
and left. 
"Why, this is tasty," exclaimed Elayne. She wiped grease off her lips. "My 
people do not eat 
flesh. Although we know of those who do and have despised them for it as a mark 
of barbarity." 
"We all are barbarians here," said Horton, shortly. 
"What was all that about cold-sleep for the Carnivore?" 
"The Carnivore loathes this planet. He wants to get off it. That's why he wants 
so badly for the 
tunnel to be opened. If the tunnel can't be opened, he'd like to leave with us." 

"Leave with you? Oh, yes, you have a ship. Or do you?" 
"We do. Out on the plain." 
"Wherever that is." 
"Just a few miles from here." 
"So you'll be leaving. May I ask where you'll be headed?" 
"Damned if I know," said Horton. "That is Ship's department. Ship says we can't 
go back to 
Earth. We've been gone too long, it seems. Ship says we'd be obsolescent if we 
did go back. That 
they wouldn't want us back, that we'd embarrass them. And from what you tell me, 
I guess there's 
no point in going back." 
"Ship," said Elayne. "You talk as if the ship's a person." 
"Well, in a way, it is." 
"That's ridiculous. I can understand how, over a long period of time, you'd 
develop a feeling of 
affection for it. Men have always personalized their machines and tools and 
weapons, but. . ." 
"Damn it," Horton told her, "you don't understand. Ship really is a person. 
Three persons, 
actually. Three human brains . . ." 
She reached out a greasy hand and grasped his arm. "Say that again," she said. 
"Say it very 
slowly." 
"Three brains," said Horton. "Three brains from three different people. Tied in 
with the ship. The 
theory was..." 
She let loose of his arm. "So it is true," she said. "It wasn't legend. There 
really were such ships." 
"Hell, yes. There were a number of them. I don't know how many." 

36
"I talked about legends earlier," she said. "How you couldn't tell the 
difference between legend 
and history. How you couldn't be sure. And this was one of the legends--ships 
that were part 
human, part machine." 
"It was nothing wonderful," he told her. "Oh, yes, I suppose wonderful, at that. 
But it tied in with 
our kind of technology--a melding of the mechanical and biological. It was in 
the realm of the 
possible. In the technological climate of our day, it was acceptable." 
"A legend come to life," she said. 
"I feel a little funny being pegged a legend." 
"Well, not really you," she said, "but the entire story. It seemed incredible to 
us, one of those kind 
of things you can't quite believe." 
"Yet you said better ways were found." 
"Different ways," she said. "Faster-than-light ships, based on new principles. 
But tell me about 
yourself. You're not the only human on the ship, of course. They would not have 
sent out a ship 
with just one man aboard." 
"There were three others, but they died. An accident, I'm told." 
"Told? You didn't know about it?" 
"I was in cold-sleep," he said. 
"In that case, if we can't get the tunnel fixed, there is room aboard." 
"For you," Horton said. "For Carnivore, as well, I suppose, if we faced the 
choice of taking him or 
leaving him behind. I don't mind telling you, however, that we don't feel quite 
easy with him. And 
there is the problem of his body chemistry." 
"I don't know," she said. "If there were nothing else that could be done, I 
suppose I'd rather leave 
with you than to stay here forever. It does not seem a charming planet." 
"I have that feeling, too," said Horton. 
"But it would mean giving up my work. You must be wondering why I came through 
the tunnel." 
"I've not had the time to ask. You said mapping. After all, it's your concern." 
She laughed. "Nothing secretive about it. Nothing mysterious. A team of us are 
mapping the 
tunnels--or, rather, trying to." 
"But Carnivore told us they are random." 
"That's because he knows nothing of them. A lot of uninformed creatures probably 
use them, and, 
of course, for them they're random. The robot said there was only one box here?" 

"That is right," said Horton. "A single oblong box. It looked like a control 
panel. With some sort 
of cover over it. Nicodemus thought the cover might be a force shield." 
"Ordinarily there are two," she said. "To select your destination, you activate 
the first box. It 
requires placing three fingers in three holes and depressing the activation 
triggers. That causes your 
so-called force field to disappear from the selection panel. You then depress 
the destination button. 
Take your fingers out of the first box and the protection shield reappears on 
the panel. To get at the 
selection panel, you must activate the first box. After you have selected your 
destination, you go 
through the tunnel." 
"But how do you know where you are going? Are there symbols on the panel that 
tell you which 
button you should push?" 
"That's the trick," she said. "There are no destination symbols, and you don't 
know where you-
are going. I suppose the tunnel builders had some way of knowing where they were 
going. They 
may have had a system that could allow them to pick a correct destination, but, 
if so, we have failed 
to find it." 
"Then you are pushing buttons in the dark." 
"The idea," she said, "is that while there are many tunnels and many 
destinations for each tunnel, 
neither the tunnels nor the destinations can be infinite. If you travel for a 
sufficient length of time, 
one of the tunnels is bound to bring you back to a place you've been before, and 
if you keep precise 
record of the button you pushed on each panel of each tunnel that you traveled 
and if enough of you 
do this, each of you leaving a record-communication at each panel before you go 
through another 
tunnel, so that if one of your teammates should pass the same way - I explain it 
badly, but you can 

37
see how, after many trials and errors, in a few instances tunnel and panel 
relationships can be 
worked out. 
Horton looked doubtful. "The odds sound long to me. Have you ever come back, as 
yet, to any 
place you've been?" 
"Not as yet," she said. 
"How many of you are there? On the team, I mean." 
"I'm not sure. They keep adding members all the time. Recruiting them and adding 
them. It's a 
sort of patriotic thing to do. Insofar, of course, as any of us are patriotic. 
The word doesn't mean, 
I'm sure, what it did at one time." 
"How do you get your information back to base? To headquarters? To wherever you 
are supposed 
to deliver it? That is, if you get any information." 
"You don't seem to understand," she said. "Some of us--perhaps many of us--never 
will get 
back, with or without information. We knew, when we took on the work, that we 
were expendable." 
"You don't sound as if you really care." 
"Oh, we care, all right. At least I do. But the work is important. Can't you see 
how important? It's 
an honor, to be allowed to search. Not everyone can go. There are requirements 
that each of us must 
meet before we are accepted." 
"Like not giving a damn if you ever get back home again." 
"Not that," Elayne said, "but a sense of self-worth that is sufficiently strong 
to maintain you 
anywhere, no matter what sort of situation you may get yourself into. Not having 
to be home to be 
yourself. Sufficient to one's self. Not dependent upon any specific environment 
or relationship. Do 
you understand?" 
"I think I catch the edge of it." 
"If we can work out a map of the tunnels, if we can establish the relationship 
of the various 
tunnels, then they can be used intelligently. Not just going blind in them as we 
must go now." 
"But Carnivore used them. And so did Shakespeare. You said you have to pick a 
destination, 
even if you don't know what that destination may be." 
"They can be used without destination selection. You can, with the exception of 
the tunnel on this 
planet, simply walk into them and go where the tunnel takes you. Under these 
conditions, the 
tunnels are truly random. Our guess is that if no destination is chosen, there 
is a calculated ran-
domness, some sort of preset randomness. No three users-perhaps no hundred 
users--using the 
tunnels in this manner, will ever arrive at the same destination. We think it 
was a calculated means 
to discourage use of the tunnels by unauthorized persons." 
"And the builders of the tunnels?" 
Elayne shook her head. "No one knows. Who they were or where they came from or 
how the 
tunnels are constructed. No hint of the underlying principles. Some people think 
that somewhere in 
the galaxy the builders still live on and that portions of the tunnels still may 
be in use. What we 
have here may be only abandoned sections of the tunnel systems, a part of an 
ancient transportation 
system for which there is now no need. Like an abandoned road that is no longer 
used because it 
leads to places no one now wants to go to, places where all purpose of going has 
long since 
disappeared." 
"There are no indications of what kind of creatures the builders were?" 
"A few," she said. "We know they must have had hands of sorts. Hands with at 
least three fingers, 
or some sort of manipulatory organs with the equivalent of at least three 
fingers. They had to have 
that many to work the panels." 
"Nothing else?" 
"Here and there," she said, "I have found representations, Paintings, carvings, 
etchings. In old 
buildings, on walls, on pottery. The representations are of many different 
life-forms, but seemingly 
one particular life-form is always there." 
"Wait a minute," said Horton. He rose from the woodpile and went into the 
Shakespeare building, 
coming back with the bottle he had found the day before. He handed it to her. 
"Like this?" he asked. 

38
She rotated the bottle slowly, then stopped and placed a finger on it; "This is 
the one," she said. 
Her finger rested on the creature that stood inside the canister. "This one is 
poorly executed," she 
said. "And done at a different angle. In other representations, you can see more 
of the body, more 
details; These things sticking from its head. . ." 
"They look like the antennae the Earth people of an ancient day used to pick up 
signals for their 
TV sets," said Horton. "Or it might represent a crown." - 
"They are antennae," said Elayne. "Biological antennae, I am sure. Perhaps sense 
organs of some 
sort. The head here looks to be a blob. All I've ever seen were blobs. No eyes, 
no ears, no mouth, 
no nose. Perhaps they have no need of these. The antennae may give them all the 
sensory input of 
which they have any need. Their heads may be no more than blobs, a thing to 
anchor the antennae. 
And the tail. You can't tell here, but the tail is bushy. The rest of the body, 
or what I could make of 
it in the other representations I have seen, is always vague as to detail--a 
sort of generalized body. 
We can't be sure they really look like this, of course. The whole thing may be 
no more than 
symbolic." 
"The art execution is poor," said Horton. "Crude and primitive. Wouldn't you 
think that the 
people who could construct the tunnels could draw better pictures of 
themselves?" 
"I've thought of that, too," Elayne said. "Maybe it's not they who draw the 
pictures. Maybe they 
have no sense of art at all. Maybe the art is done by other peoples, inferior 
people, perhaps. They 
may not draw from actual knowledge, but from myth. Perhaps the myth of the 
tunnel builders 
survives throughout a good part of the galaxy, shared in common by many 
different people, many 
different racial memories persisting through the ages." 

16 
THE stench of the pond was horrifying, but as Horton approached it seemed to 
lessen. The first 
faint whiff of it had been worse than down here near the water's edge. Perhaps, 
he told himself, it 
smelled worse when it began to break up and dissipate. Here, where it lay heavy, 
the foulness of it 
was suppressed and masked by its other components, the nonstench components that 
went to make 
it up. 
The pond, he saw, was somewhat larger than it had appeared when he first had 
seen it from the 
ruined settlement. It lay placid, without a ripple on it. The shoreline was 
clean; no underbrush or 
reeds or any other kind of vegetation encroaching on it. Except for occasional 
small runlets of sand 
brought down off the hillside by runoff water, the shore was granite. The pond 
apparently lay in a 
hollowed bowl in the underlying rock. And, as the shore was clean, so was the 
water. There was no 
scum upon it as might be expected in a body of stagnant water. Apparently no 
vegetation, perhaps 
no life of any sort, could exist within the pond. But despite its cleanliness, 
it was not clear. It 
seemed to hold within itself a dark murkiness. It was neither blue nor green--it 
was almost black. 
Horton stood on the rocky shore, with the remnant of meat clutched in his hand. 
There was about 
the pond, about the bowl in which it lay, a sort of somberness that verged on 
melancholy, if not on 
actual fear. It was a depressing place, he told himself, but not entirely 
without its fascination, it was 
the kind of place where a man could crouch and think morbid thoughts--morbid and 
romantic. A 
painter, perhaps, could use it as a model to paint a canvas of a lonely tarn, 
capturing within his 
composition a sense of lonely lostness and divorcement from reality. 
We all are lost, Shakespeare had written in that long paragraph at the end of 
Pericles. He had 
written only in an allegorical sense, but here, less than a mile from where he 
had written the 
paragraph, writing in the flaring of the homemade candle, was that lostness of 
which he had written. 
He had written well, that strange human from some other world, thought Horton, 
for it seemed now 
that everyone was lost. Certainly Ship and Nicodemus and himself were lost in 
the vastness of no-
return, and from what Elayne had said, back there by the fire, the rest of 
humanity as well. Perhaps 
the only ones who were not were those people, that handful of people, who still 
remained on Earth. 
Poor as Earth might be this day, Earth still was home to them. 
Although, come to think of it, Elayne and the other searchers of the tunnels 
might not be lost in 
the same sense that all the others were. Lost, perhaps, in the sense that they 
never knew where they 

39
might be going, or what kind of planet they would find, but definitely not lost 
in the sense that they 
ever needed to know exactly where they were-- self-sufficient to the point that 
they had no need of 
other humans, no need of familiarity, strange people who had outgrown the need 
of home. And was 
that, he asked himself, the way to defeat the sense of lostness--to no longer 
need a home? 
He walked close to the water's edge and hurled the meat far out. It landed with 
a splash and 
disappeared immediately, as if the pond had accepted it, reaching out and taking 
it, sucking it down 
into itself. Concentric ripples ran out from the center of the splash, but did 
not reach the shore. The 
ripples were suppressed. They ran for a ways and then were flattened out and 
disappeared, the pond 
returning to its calm serenity, to the black flatness of itself. As if, Horton 
told himself, it valued its 
serenity and did not tolerate disturbances. 
And now, he thought, it was time to leave. He'd done what he had come to do, and 
it was time to 
leave. But he did not leave; he stayed. As if there were something there that 
told him not to leave, as 
if, for some reason, he should linger for a while, as a man may overstay his 
time at the bedside of a 
dying friend, wanting to leave, uncomfortable in the face of oncoming death, but 
still staying 
because of a feeling that it would be the negation of an old friendship if one 
were to leave too soon. 
He stood and gazed about him. To the left loomed the ridge where the abandoned 
settlement was 
located. From where he stood, however, there was no sign of the settlement. The 
houses were 
hidden by the trees. Straight ahead lay what seemed to be a swamp and to the 
right a conical hill--a 
mound--that he had not noticed until now and which apparently did not stand out 
with distinctness 
from the settlement ridge. 
It rose, he judged, a couple of hundred feet above the level of the pond. 
Symmetrical, it seemed a 
perfect cone, tapering to a jagged point. It had something of the appearance of 
a volcanic cinder 
cone, but he knew that it was not. Aside from the fact that it was apparent it 
could not be a cone, he 
could not pin down his immediate rejection of it as volcanic. Lone trees grew 
here and there upon it, 
but otherwise it was bare of vegetation except for the grasslike growth that 
covered it. Looking at it, 
he crinkled his brow in puzzlement. There was, he told himself, no geologic 
factor he had observed 
or could immediately bring to mind that would explain a formation of that sort. 
He returned his attention to the pond, remembering what Carnivore had said--that 
it was not 
really water, that it was more like soup, too thick and heavy to be water. 
Walking down to the edge of it, he squatted and carefully reached out a finger 
to test the fluid. 
The surface seemed to resist slightly, as if it might have a fairly tough 
surface tension. His finger 
did not plunge into it. Instead, under slight pressure, the surface became 
indented beneath his 
fingertip. He applied more pressure, and the finger broke through. Plunging in 
his hand, he rotated 
his wrist so that his cupped palm was uppermost. Lifting his hand slowly, he saw 
that he had a 
handful of fluid. It lay quietly in his curved palm, not seeping through his 
imperfectly closed fingers 
as water would have. It seemed to be in one piece. For the love of Christ, he 
thought, a piece of 
water! 
Although by now he knew it wasn't water. Strange, he thought, that Shakespeare 
had known no 
more than it was soupy. Although perhaps he did. There was a lot of writing in 
the book, and he'd 
read only a few paragraphs of it. Like soup, Carnivore had said, but this bore 
no resemblance to 
soup. It was warmer than Horton had thought it would be, and heavier, although 
that was a matter 
of judgment and to be certain, the fluid would have to be weighed and there was 
no way he could 
weigh it. It was slippery to the touch. Like mercury, although it wasn't 
mercury; he was sure of that. 
He turned his wrist and allowed the fluid to run out. When it was gone, his palm 
was dry. The liquid 
was not wet. 
Unbelievable, he told himself. A liquid warmer than water, heavier, cohesive, 
not wet. Perhaps 
Nicodemus had a transmog--no, the hell with that. Nicodemus had a job to do and 
once he'd got it 
done, they'd be getting out of here, off this planet, and on into space, to 
other planets probably, or 
perhaps to no planets at all. And if that should be the case, he'd stay in 
cold-sleep and not be 
revived. The thought did not seem to frighten him as much as it should have. 
Now, for the first time, he admitted what had been at the back of his mind, more 
than likely, all 
the time. This planet was no good. Carnivore had said as much in his first words 
of greeting, that 

40
the planet was no good. Not frightening, not dangerous, not repulsive--just not 
worth a damn. Not 
the kind of place that a man would want to stay. 
He tried to analyze the reasons for his thinking this, but there seemed to be no 
specific factors he 
could line up and count. It was just a hunch, an unconscious psychological 
reaction. Perhaps the 
trouble was that this planet was too much like the Earth--a sort of dowdy Earth. 
He had expected 
that an alien planet would be alien, not a pale, unsatisfactory copy of the 
Earth. More than likely, 
other planets were more satisfactorily alien. He'd have to ask Elayne, he told 
himself, for she would 
know. Strange, he thought, how she had come through the tunnel and walking up 
the path. Strange 
that on this planet two human lives would cross--no, not two, but three, for he 
was forgetting 
Shakespeare. Somehow fate had dipped down into its bag of tricks and had 
conjured up three 
humans, within a very limited space of time--so limited that they'd encounter 
one another or, in the 
case of Shakespeare, almost encounter one another--would, at least, all three of 
them, have impact 
on one another. Elayne was down at the tunnel now with Nicodemus, and in just a 
while he'd join 
them, but before he did, he probably should investigate the conical hill. 
Although how he'd 
investigate it or what his investigation would tell him, he had no idea. But 
somehow it seemed 
important that he have a look at it. More than likely he had the feeling, he 
told himself, because it 
seemed so out of place. 
He rose from his squatting and walked slowly around the edge of the pond, 
heading for the hill. 
The sun, halfway up the eastern sky, was warm. They sky was pale blue, without a 
sign of cloud. 
He found himself wondering what the planet's weather pattern might be like. He'd 
ask Carnivore; 
Carnivore had been here long enough to know. 
He rounded the pond and came to the foot of the hill. The ascent was so steep 
that he was forced 
to go almost on hands and knees, bending forward to claw at the grasslike ground 
cover to keep 
from falling back and to help himself along. 
Halfway up he halted, breath rasping in his throat. He stretched at full length 
on the ground, 
clawing his hands into the soil to keep himself from sliding back. He twisted 
his head so he could 
see the pond. Now its surface was blue instead of black. The mirror blackness of 
it was reflecting 
the blueness of the sky. He was panting so hard with the effort of his climb 
that it seemed to him the 
hill was panting with him--or perhaps that some great heart inside of it was 
beating rhythmically. 
Still half-winded, he got on hands and knees again and finally reached the top. 
There, on a small 
flat platform which crowned the hill, he looked down the other side and saw that 
the hill truly was a 
cone. Around its entire circumference, the slope thrust upward at the selfsame 
angle as the one he'd 
climbed. 
Sitting cross-legged, he stared out across the pond to where, on the opposite 
ridge, he could make 
out some of the masonry of the deserted settlement. He tried to trace the 
outline of the houses, but 
found it was impossible because of the heavy growth that broke up the lines. 
Slightly to his left 
stood the Shakespeare house. A thin trickle of smoke rose from the cooking fire. 
He could see no 
one around. Carnivore, more than likely, was not back from his hunting trip. 
Because of the dip of 
the ground, he could not see the tunnel. 
As he sat, he pulled absentmindedly at the ground cover. Some of it came loose, 
clay clinging to 
the roots. Clay, he told himself, that's funny. What would clay be doing here? 
He got out a pocket 
knife and opening a blade, stabbed at the soil, digging a little pit. As far as 
he could dig, it was clay. 
What, he asked himself, if the entire hill was clay? A sort of monstrous frost 
boil, heaved up in a 
bygone day and remaining till this moment. He cleaned the blade and closed it, 
put the knife back 
into his pocket. It would be interesting, he thought, if he had the time, to 
untangle the geology of 
this place. But what difference did it make? It would take a lot of time and he 
didn't plan to stay 
that long. 
Getting to his feet, he went carefully down the slope. 
At the tunnel, he found Elayne and Nicodemus. She was sitting on a boulder 
watching Nicodemus 
work. He had a chisel and a hammer and was tapping out a line around the panel. 
"You're back again," Elayne said to Horton. "What took you so long?" 
"I did some exploring." 

41
"In the city? Nicodemus told me about the city." 
"Not in the city," said Horton, "and it isn't any city." 
Nicodemus turned around, the hammer and chisel hanging in his hand. "I'm trying 
to chisel the 
panel out of the rock," he-said. "Maybe if I can do that, I can get at its 
backside and work on it from 
there." 
"What you'll do," said Horton, "is cut the wires." 
"There wouldn't be any wires," said Elayne. "Nothing quite that crude." 
"Maybe, too," said Nicodemus, "if I can free the panel, I may be able to pry the 
cover loose." 
"The cover? You said it was a force field." 
"I don't know what it is," said Nicodemus. 
"I take it," said Horton, "that there was no second box. The one that triggered 
the cover." 
"No," said Elayne, "and that means someone tampered with the setup. Someone who 
didn't want 
anyone to leave this planet." 
"You mean the planet's closed?" 
"I suppose that is it," she said. "I suppose there would have been some sign set 
up at the other 
tunnels warning against using the selector which would take anyone to this 
planet, but if so, the 
signs are long since gone, or maybe they are there and we don't know what to 
look for." 
"Even if you found them," Nicodemus said, "you probably couldn't read them." 
"That is right," said Elayne. 
Carnivore came stalking along the path. "I am back with fresh new meat," he 
announced. "How 
are you doing here? Have you got it solved?" 
"No," said Nicodemus, turning back to work. 
"It takes you long," said Carnivore. 
Nicodemus swung around again. "Get off my back!" he snapped "You've been riding 
me ever 
since I started. You and your friend Shakespeare messed around for years without 
doing anything, 
and now you expect us to get it all worked out within an hour or two." 
"But tools you have," wailed Carnivore, "Tools and training. Shakespeare, he had 
none of this, 
nor did I. It would seem, with tools and training. . ." 
"Carnivore," said Horton, "we never told you we could do anything. Nicodemus 
said he'd try. 
You have no guarantee. Stop acting as if we're breaking a promise that we made 
you. There never 
was a promise." 
"Better, perhaps," said Carnivore, "that we attempt some magic. Magic put 
together. My magic, 
your magic and her magic." He pointed at Elayne. 
"Magic wouldn't work," said Nicodemus, shortly. "If there is such a thing as 
magic." 
"Oh, there's magic, all right," said Carnivore. "That is not in question." He 
appealed to Elayne. 
"Would you not say so?" 
"I have seen magic," she said, "or what was reputed to be magic. Some of it 
appeared to work. 
Not every time, of course." 
"Happenstance," said Nicodemus. 
"No, more than happenstance," she said. 
"Why don't we all just clear out," said Horton, "and give Nicodemus a chance to 
do what he is 
doing. Unless," he said to Nicodemus, "you think you need some help." 
"I don't," said Nicodemus. 
"Let's go and see the city," Elayne suggested. "I'm dying to see it." 
"We'll stop at the camp and pick up a flashlight," Horton said. He asked 
Nicodemus, "We have a 
flashlight, haven't we?" 
"Yes," said Nicodemus. "You'll find it in the pack." 
"You're going along with us?" Horton asked Carnivore. "If you please, no," said 
Carnivore. "The 
city is a nervous place for me. I'll stay right here. I'll cheer the robot on." 
"You'll keep your mouth shut," said Nicodemus. "You'll not breathe on me. You'll 
offer no 
advice." 
"I'll act," said a humble Carnivore, "as if I were not here." 

42

17 
Committees had been her life, the grande dame admitted to herself, and there had 
been a time 
when she had thought of this present matter as a committee action. Just another 
committee, she had 
told herself, trying to fight down the fear of what she had agreed to, trying to 
put it in commonplace 
and (to her) understandable terms so that it would present no place for fear to 
lodge. Although, she 
remembered, the fear of it had been outweighed by another fear. And why was it, 
she asked herself, 
that fear must be the motive? At the time, of course, except in certain secret 
moments, she had not 
admitted to the fear. She had told herself, and led others to believe, that she 
had acted out of pure 
unselfishness, that she had no other thought than the good of humankind. She was 
believed, or 
thought she was believed, because such a motive and her action fitted in so 
neatly with what she 
had been doing all her life. She was known for good deeds and a deep compassion 
for all suffering 
humanity, and it was easy to suppose that her devotion to the welfare of the 
people of the Earth was 
simply carrying over into this final sacrifice. 
Although, so far as she could recall, she had never thought of it as a 
sacrifice. She had been quite 
willing, she remembered, to let others think so, at times had even encouraged 
such belief. For it 
seemed a very noble act to sacrifice oneself, and she wanted to be remembered 
for her noble acts - 
this final one the greatest of them all. Nobility and honor, she thought; those 
had been what she 
prized the most. But not, she was forced to agree, a quiet nobility and a silent 
honor, for if that had 
been the case she'd have not been noticed. That, for her, would have been 
unthinkable, for she 
needed notice and acclaim. Chairwoman, president, past president, national 
representative, 
secretary, treasurer--all of these and more--organization piled upon 
organization, until she had no 
time to think, with every moment occupied, always on the go. 
No time to think? she asked herself. Was that the reason behind all her frantic 
effort? Not the 
honor and the glory, but so she wouldn't have to think? So she wouldn't have to 
think of the ruined 
marriages, of the men who turned away, of the emptiness she felt as the years 
went on? 
That was why she was here, she knew. Because she had been a failure--because she 
had failed 
not only others, but herself as well, and in the end had recognized herself as a 
woman who sought 
frantically for something she had missed, missing it, perhaps, because she did 
not recognize the 
value of it until it was too late. 
And, in view of this, she knew, this present venture had turned out all right, 
although there had 
been many times when she had doubted it. 
There has never been a time when I doubted it, said the scientist. I was always 
sure. 
You peeked, said the grande dame, bitterly. You peeked into my thoughts. Is 
there no privacy at 
all? One's own personal thoughts should be private. It is bad manners, peeking. 
We are one, said the scientist, or we should be one. No longer three 
personalities, no longer one 
woman and two men. But a mind, one mind. Yet we stay apart. We stand apart more 
often than we 
are together. And in that way we have failed. 
We have not failed, said the monk. We have only started. We have eternity and I 
am the one who 
can define eternity. All my life I lived for eternity, suspecting even as I 
lived for it that for me there 
would be no eternity. Not for me or for anyone. But now I know that I was wrong. 
We've found 
eternity, the three of us--or if not actual eternity, what could be eternity. We 
have changed and we 
will change and in the aeons before this materialistic ship has powdered into 
dust, we undoubtedly 
will become an eternal mind that will have no need of ship nor even the biologic 
brains that now 
house our minds. We will become a single free agent that can roam forever across 
all infinity. But I 
think I told you I had a definition for eternity. Not a definition, really, but 
a pretty tale. The Church, 
you must understand, formulated through the years many pretty tales. This one 
has to do with a 
mile-high mountain and a bird. Every thousand years the bird, which for the 
purpose of the story, 
was extremely long-lived, would fly above the mountain and, in doing so, one of 
its wings would 
touch the mountain and wear away an infinitesimal segment of it. Each thousand 
years the bird did 
this and eventually wore the mountain, with the impact of its wing, down to a 
level plain. And this, 
you say, this wearing down of a mountain by the scraping of a bird's wing every 
thousand years, 

43
would be eternity. But you would be wrong. It would be no more than the 
beginning of eternity. 
It is a silly tale, said the scientist. Eternity is not a term that lends itself 
to definition. It is a catch-
all vagueness to which we cannot assign a value, any more than a value can be 
assigned to infinity. 
I liked the story, said the grande dame. It has a pretty ring to it. It is the 
kind of simple story that I 
found so telling in the speeches that I made to many different groups in many 
different causes. But if 
you should ask me now to name those groups and the causes, I should find it 
difficult to list them. I 
wish, Sir Monk, that I had known your story. I would, lam sure, have found 
occasion to use it. It 
would have been most fetching. It would have brought the house down. 
The story is silly, said the scientist, because long before your long-lived bird 
could have made 
even a tiny mark upon the mountain, the natural forces of erosion would have 
reduced it to a 
peneplain. 
You have the advantage over the other two of us, said the monk disapprovingly. 
You have a 
scientific logic by which to guide your thoughts and interpret your experiences. 

The logic of mankind, said the scientist, is a poor reed to lean upon. It is a 
logic dictated by 
observation and despite our many marvelous instruments, our observations were 
severely 
restricted. Now the three of us must formulate a new logic based upon our 
current observations. We 
will find, I am sure, much error in our earthly logic. 
I know but little of logic other than the logic I studied as a churchman, said 
the monk, and that 
logic was more often based upon obscure intellectual gymnastics than on 
scientific observation. 
And I, said the grande dame, operated on logic not at all, but upon certain 
techniques used to 
advance certain activities to which I had become committed, although I'm not 
sure that committed 
is the proper word to use. I have a hard time recalling now just how committed I 
might have been to 
the causes that I worked for. In all frankness, I think it was not so much the 
causes that motivated 
me as the opportunity which they gave me to hold and exercise certain positions 
of power. Thinking 
on it now, those positions of power which seemed so desirable and exhilarating, 
sink to nothing 
now. But I must, in all truth, have distinguished myself in the public mind, for 
how otherwise would 
I have been offered the honor bestowed upon the three of us when it was decided 
that one of us must 
be a woman. So I would suppose that heading numerous committees, serving upon 
many 
commissions, involved in sundry study groups upon subjects of which I knew next 
to nothing, and 
speaking to both small and large assemblies, must have seemed worthwhile. And 
after all this time, 
trying to make up my mind as to whether it is right for me to be here, I am glad 
they did. I am glad 
I'm here. If I were not, I would be nowhere, Sir Monk, for I don't think I was 
ever able to convince 
myself to believe in your construction of an immortal soul. 
Not my construction, said the monk. I did not believe, either, in everlasting 
life. I tried to make 
myself believe, because in my business it was basic that I should believe. And 
there was, as well, my 
fear of death, and I suppose, life as well. 
You accepted your post here with us, said the grande dame, because of your fear 
of death, and I 
because of honor--because it was not in me to reject the honor and esteem. I 
felt I might be being 
conned into something I'd regret, but I had sought the limelight too long to be 
constitutionally 
capable of rejecting it. At the very least, I told myself, it was a way of going 
out in a greater flare of 
publicity than I had ever dreamed. 
And now, said the scientist, it seems all right to you? You are satisfied your 
acceptance was 
correct? 
I am satisfied, she said. I am even beginning to forget, which I find to be a 
blessing. There was 
Ronny and Doug and Alphonse... 
Who were they? asked the monk. 
The men I was married to. They and a couple of others whose names I can't 
recall. I don't mind 
telling you, although there was a time I would have, that I was something of a 
bitch. A rather 
queenly bitch, perhaps, but still a dirty bitch. 
It seems to me, said the scientist, that we are working out as it was intended. 
Taking somewhat 
longer, more than likely, than had been intended. But in another thousand years, 
perhaps, we may 
be able to become what we were meant to be. We are being honest with ourselves 
and with one 

44
another, and I imagine that must be a part of it. We cannot entirely slough off 
our humanity in so 
short a time. The human race spent two million years or so in developing that 
humanity and it's not 
something that can be peeled off as one would take off his clothes. 
And you, Sir Scientist? 
Me? 
Yes, what about yourself? The other two of us are finally honest. What about 
yourself? 
Me? I've never thought of it. There's never been a doubt. Any scientist, 
especially an astronomer 
like myself, would have sold his soul to go. Come to think of it, figuratively, 
I may have sold my 
soul. I connived to be named to this conglomerate of intellectuality, or 
whatever you may call it. I 
connived to be named. I would have fought for it. I implored certain friends, 
most privately and dis-
creetly, to second my nomination. I would have done anything at all. I did not 
think of my selection 
as an honor. I did not act as did the two of you, from fear, and yet, in a way, 
I may have. I was 
growing old, you know, and I was beginning to get that frantic feeling that 
little time was left, that 
the sands were running out. Yes, come to think of it, there may have been some 
fear, a subconscious 
fear. But, basically, it was the feeling that I could not afford to go down into 
the final dark with so 
much still to do. Not that what I observe now or what I deduce now will have any 
earthly impact, 
for I am no longer part of Earth. 
But, in the final reckoning, I don't think that ever mattered. My work was not 
for Earth nor for my 
fellow men, but for myself--for my own personal satisfaction and gratification. 
I did not look for 
plaudits. Unlike you, dear lady, I hid myself away. I shunned publicity, I gave 
no interviews and I 
wrote no books. Papers - certainly, to share my findings with my fellow workers, 
but nothing for the 
man in the street to read. I think, if you summed it up, that I am, or was, an 
extremely selfish man. I 
cared for no one but myself. I now am glad to tell you that my position with the 
two of you is very 
comfortable. As if we were old friends, although we were never friends before, 
nor perhaps are any 
of the three of us really friends to the other two in the classical definition 
of friendship. But if we 
can get along, I think that under the circumstances, we can call that 
friendship. 
What a crew we turn out to be, said the monk. A selfish scientist, a 
glory-hunting woman, and a 
monk who was afraid. 
Was? 
I'm afraid no longer. There is nothing that can touch me or either one of you. 
We have got it 
made. 
We still have a way to go, said the scientist. Here there is no place nor time 
for gloating. Humble, 
humble, humble. 
I've been humble all my earthly life, said the monk. I'm through with being 
humble. 

18 
"THERE is something wrong," said Elayne. "Something out of place. No, maybe 
that's not it. But 
there is a somethingness that we haven't found. There is a situation waiting 
here--perhaps not for 
us, but waiting." 
She was tensed, almost rigid, and into Horton's mind came the remembrance of 
that old setter 
with which, at times, he had hunted quail. A sense of expectancy, a knowing and 
a not-quite-
knowing, a standing on tiptoe with acute awareness. 
He stayed, waiting, and finally, with a seeming effort, she relaxed. 
Elayne looked at him with begging eyes, begging to be believed. "Don't laugh at 
me," she said. "I 
know there's something here--something most unusual. I don't know what it is." 
"I'm not laughing at you," he told her. "I'll take your word for it. But how. . 
." 
"I don't know," she said. "Once, in a situation such as this, I would have 
distrusted myself. But 
not any longer. It has happened before, many times before. Almost like a certain 
knowing. Like a 
warning." 
"You think it might be dangerous." 
"There is no way to know," she said. "Just that sense of somethingness." 
"We've found nothing so far," he said, and that was true enough. In the three 
buildings they had 

45
explored, there had been nothing but the dust, the rotting furniture, the 
ceramics, and the glass. To 
an archaeologist, there might have been significance, Horton told himself, but 
to the two of them, 
there had been simply oldness--a musty, dusty, repetitive oldness that was at 
once futile and 
depressive. At some time in the distant past intelligent beings had lived here, 
but there was, to his 
untrained eyes, no indication of their purpose here. 
"I've often thought about it," she said. "Wondered about it. For I'm not the 
only one who has it. 
There are others. A new ability, an acquired instinct--there is no way of 
telling. When men went 
into space and landed on other planets, they were forced to adapt to--what would 
you call it?--the 
unlikely, perhaps. They had to develop new survival techniques, new habits of 
thinking, new 
insights and senses. Maybe that's what we have, a new kind of sense, a new 
awareness. The 
pioneers of Earth, when they pushed out into unknown areas, developed something 
of the sort. 
Primitive man had it, perhaps, as well. But back on old settled and civilized 
Earth, there came a 
time when there was no longer any need of it and it was lost. In a civilized 
environment there were 
few surprises. One knew fairly well what he might expect. But when he went out 
to the stars, he 
found a new need of this old awareness." 
"Don't look at me," said Horton. "I'm one of those people from what you call 
civilized Earth." 
"Was it civilized?" 
"To answer that, you must define the term. What is civilized?" 
"I wouldn't know," she said. "I have never seen a completely civilized 
world--not in the sense 
that Earth was civilized. Or I don't think I have. These days you can't be sure. 
You and I, Carter 
Horton, come from different ages. 
There may be times when the only proper course will be for each of us to be 
patient with the 
other." 
"You sound as if you've seen a lot of worlds." 
"1 have," she said. "On this mapping job. You reach a place, stay a day or 
two--well, maybe 
more than that, but never very long. Only long enough to make some observations 
and jot down 
some notes, to get an impression of what kind of world it is. So you'll be able 
to recognize it, you 
see, if you come back to it again. For it's important to know if the tunnel 
system ever brings you 
back to a place you've been before. Some places you'd like to stay awhile. Once 
in a great while, 
you find a really pleasant place. But there are few of these. Mostly you are 
glad to leave." 
"Tell me one thing," Horton said "I've been wondering about it. You are on this 
mapping 
expedition. That is what you call it. It sounds to me more like a wild-goose 
chase. Your chances 
can't be more than one in a million and yet..." 
"I told you there are others." 
"But even if there were a million of you, there'd be only one of you who has any 
chance of 
returning to a world that has been visited before. And just one of you finding 
their way back would 
be a waste of time. There'd have to be a number of you who succeeded before 
there could be any 
statistical probability the tunnels could be mapped, or even started to be 
mapped." 
She stared coldly at him. "Back there where you came from, you, of course, had 
heard of faith." 
"Certainly I have heard of faith. Faith in one's self, faith in one's country, 
faith in one's religion. 
What has that got to do with it?" 
"Faith is often all that one possesses." 
"Faith," he said, "is thinking something's possible when you're quite sure it's 
not." 
"Why so cynical?" she asked. "Why so short of vision? Why so materialistic?" 
"I'm not cynical," he said. "I just take the odds into some account. And we were 
not short of 
vision. We were the ones, remember, who first went to the stars and we were able 
to go, to persuade 
ourselves to go, because of the materialism you seem so much to scorn." 
"That is true," she agreed, "but that's not what I am talking about. Earth was 
one thing; the stars 
are another. When you get out among the stars, the values change, the viewpoints 
shift. There's an 
ancient phrase--it's a different ball game--can you tell me what that phrase 
means?" 
"I suppose it alludes to some sort of sports event." 
"You mean those silly exercises that once were held on Earth?" 

46
"You don't hold them any more? No sports events at all?" 
"There is too much to do, too much to learn. We no longer need to seek 
artificial amusement. We 
haven't got the time, and even if we had, no one would be interested." 
Elayne pointed at a building almost engulfed by brush and trees. "I think that's 
the one," she said. 
"The one?" 
"The one where the strangeness is. The somethingness that I have been talking 
about." 
"Should we go and see?" 
"I'm not entirely sure," she said. "To tell you the truth, I'm a little 
frightened. By what we might 
find, you know." 
"You have no idea? You say you can sense this something-ness. Does your 
perception extend far 
enough to give you at least some hint?" 
Elayne shook her head. "Only that it's strange. Something out of the ordinary. 
Perhaps 
frightening, although I feel no actual fright. Just a tugging at my mind, a fear 
of the unusual, of the 
unsuspected. Just this terrible sense of strangeness." 
"It's going to be tough getting there," he said. "That growth is fairly dense. I 
could go back to 
camp and get a machete. I think that we brought one along." 
"No need," she said. She unholstered the weapon on her belt. 
"This will burn a path," she said. It was larger than it had looked when 
holstered, needle-nosed 
and a bit cumbersome. 
He eyed it. "A laser?" 
"I suppose so. I don't know. Not a weapon only, but a tool. It's standard on my 
home planet. 
Everyone carries one of them. You can adjust it, see. . ." She showed him the 
dial set into the grip. 
"A narrow cutting edge, a fan effect, whatever you may want. But why do you ask? 
You carry one 
as well." 
"Different," said Horton. "A fairly crude weapon, but effective if you know how 
to handle it. It 
throws a projectile. A bullet. Forty-five caliber. A weapon, not a tool." 
Elayne crinkled her brow. "I have heard of the principle," she said. "A very 
ancient concept." 
"Perhaps," said Horton, "but up to the time I left the Earth, the best we had. 
In the hands of a man 
who knows its operation, it is precise and very deadly. High velocity, 
tremendous stopping power. 
Powder-powered--nitrate, I think, maybe cordite. I'm not up on the chemistry." 
"But powder--no compound--could last the many years that you were on the ship. 
It would 
break down with time." 
Horton gave her a startled look, surprised at her knowledge. "I hadn't thought 
of that," he said. 
"But it's true. The matter converter, of course. . ." 
"You have a matter converter?" 
"That's what Nicodemus tells me. I haven't actually seen it. I have never seen 
one, to tell you the 
truth. There was no such thing as a matter converter when we went into 
cold-sleep. It was 
developed later." 
"Another legend," she said. "A lost art. . ." "Not at all," said Horton. 
"Technology." She 
shrugged. "Whatever it is--lost. We have no matter converter. As I said, another 
legend." 
"Well," asked Horton, "are we going to see what this something of yours is, or 
do we. . ." 
"We'll go and see," she said. "I'll set it at the lowest power." 
She leveled the contraption, and a pale blue haze leaped out from it. The 
underbrush puffed with 
an eerie whisper, and dust floated in the air. 
"Careful," he cautioned. 
"Don't worry," she said sharply. "I know how to use it." It was evident she did. 
She cut a neat and 
narrow path, detouring around a tree. "No use of burning it. It would be a 
waste." 
"You still feel it?" Horton asked. "The strangeness. Can you figure what it is?" 

"It still is there," she said, "but I have no more idea what it is than I ever 
had." 
She holstered the gun and, shining the light ahead of him, Horton led the way 
into the building. 
The place was dark and dusty. Pieces of crumbling furniture stood along the 
walls. A small 
animal squeaked in sudden terror and raced across the room, a blur of motion in 
the darkness. 

47
"A mouse," said Horton. 
Elayne said, unruffled, "Probably not a mouse. Mice belong on Earth, or so say 
the old nursery 
rhymes. There's that old one, hickory dickory dock, the mouse ran up the clock." 

"Then the nursery rhymes survived?" 
"Some of them," she said. "I suspect not all of them." 
A closed door confronted them, and Horton put out his hand and pushed against 
it. The door 
collapsed and fell into a pile across the threshold. 
He lifted the torch and shone the light into the room beyond. The room flared 
back at them, a 
glare of golden light thrown back into their faces. They staggered back a step 
or two and Horton 
lowered the flash. Cautiously he raised it again and this time, through the 
flare of the reflected light, 
they saw what it was that had given rise to the reflection. In the center of the 
room, almost filling it, 
stood a cube. 
Horton lowered the flash to cut down on the reflection and moving slowly, 
stepped into the room. 
The light from the flash, no longer reflected by the cube, seemed to be absorbed 
by it, sucked in 
and spread out throughout its interior so that it seemed the cube was lighted. 
A creature lay suspended in the light. A creature--that was the only description 
that would come 
to mind. It was huge, almost filling the cube, its body extending beyond their 
line of vision. For a 
moment, there was a sense of mass, but not just any kind of mass. There was a 
sense of life in it, a 
certain flow of line that said instinctively it was a living mass. What seemed 
to be a head was 
hunched down low against what may have been its chest. And the body--or was it a 
body? A body 
covered by an intricate filigree of etching. Like armor, Horton thought--an 
expensive example of 
the goldsmith's art. 
Beside him, Elayne gasped with wonder. "It's beautiful," she said. 
Horton felt frozen, half with wonder, half with fear. "It has a head," he said. 
"The damn thing is 
alive." 
"It hasn't moved," she told him. "And it would have moved. At the first touch of 
light, it would 
have moved." 
"It's asleep," said Horton. 
"I don't think it's asleep," she said. 
"It has to be alive," he said. "You sensed it. This has to be the strangeness 
that you sensed. You 
still have no idea what it is?" 
"None at all," she said. "Nothing that I've ever heard about. No legends. No 
elder stories. Nothing 
at all. And so beautiful. Horrible, but beautiful. All those fine, intricate 
designs. It is something it is 
wearing--no, I see now it is not something it is wearing. The etchings are on 
scales." 
Horton tried to trace the outline of the body, but each time he tried, he 
failed. He'd start out all 
right and trace it for a ways, then the outline would be gone, fading and 
dissolved in the golden 
haze that lingered in the cube, lost in the convoluted intricacies of the form 
itself. 
He took a step forward for a closer look and was stopped--stopped by nothing. 
There was nothing 
there to stop him; it was as if he had run into a wall he could neither see nor 
feel. No, not a wall, he 
thought. His mind scurried frantically for some sort of simile that would 
express what had 
happened. But there seemed no simile, for the thing that stopped him was a 
nothingness. He lifted 
his free hand and felt in front of him. The hand found nothing, but the hand was 
stopped. No 
physical sensation, nothing he could feel or sense. It was, he thought, as if he 
had encountered the 
end of reality, as if he'd reached a place where there was nowhere to go. As if 
someone had drawn a 
line and said the world ends here, there is nothing that extends beyond this 
line. No matter what you 
see, or think you see, there is nothing there. But if that were true, he 
thought, there was something 
very wrong, for he could see beyond reality. 
"There is nothing there," said Elayne, "but there must be something there. `We 
can see the cube 
and creature." 
Horton stepped back a pace and, in that moment, the goldenness of the cube 
seemed to flood out 
and enfold the two of them, making them a part of the creature and the cube. In 
that golden haze, 
the world seemed to go away and for the moment they stood alone, divorced from 
time and space. 

48
Elayne stood close to him and looking down, he saw the rose tattooed on her 
breast. He reached 
out a hand and touched it. 
"Beautiful," he said. 
"Thank you, sir," she said. 
"You do not mind that I noticed it?" 
She shook her head. "I had been beginning to feel disappointed that you hadn't 
noticed it. You 
must have known that it was there to direct attention. The rose is intended as a 
focal point" 

19 
NICODEMUS said, "Take a look at this." 
Horton bent to stare at the faint line the robot had chiseled in the stone 
around the perimeter of the 
panel. 
"What do you mean?" he asked. "I see nothing wrong. Except that it seems you 
haven't made 
much progress." 
"That is exactly what is wrong," said Nicodemus. "I have been getting nowhere. 
The chisel chips 
the stone for a depth of a few millimeters; then the stone gets hard. As if it 
were a metal with a 
small portion of its surface reduced to rust." 
"But it isn't metal." 
"No, it's stone, all right. I tried other parts of the rock face." He gestured 
toward the wall of stone, 
indicating scratches on it. "It's the same on the entire face. Weathering seems 
to be at work, but 
underneath the weathering, the stone is incredibly hard. As if the molecules 
were bonded more 
tightly than they should be naturally." 
"Where is Carnivore?" asked Elayne. "He might know something of this." 
"I doubt it very much," said Horton. 
"I sent him packing," said Nicodemus. "I told him to get the hell out. He was 
breathing down my 
neck and cheering me on. . ." 
"He is so terribly anxious to get off this planet," said Elayne. 
"Who wouldn't be?" asked Horton. 
"I feel so sorry for him," said Elayne. "You're sure there is no way to put him 
on the ship--if all 
else fails, I mean." 
"I don't see how," said Horton. "We could try cold-sleep, of course, but it 
would more than likely 
kill him. What do you think, Nicodemus?" 
"Cold-sleep is tailor-made for humans," said the robot. "How it would work with 
another species, 
I have no idea. I would suspect not too well, perhaps not at all. First of all, 
the anesthetic that shocks 
the cells into momentary suspension until the cold can take effect. Almost 
foolproof for humans 
because it is designed for humans. To work with some other form of life, there 
might have to be a 
change. The change might be small and rather subtle, I imagine. And I'm not 
equipped to change 
it." 
"You mean he'd be dead even before he had a chance of freezing?" 
"I would suspect that would be the case." 
"But you can't just leave him here," said Elayne. "You can't go off and leave 
him." 
"We could put him on board," said Horton. 
"Not with me you can't," said Nicodemus. "I'd kill him in the first week out. 
He's sandpaper on 
my nerves." 
"Even if he escaped your homicidal tendencies," said Horton, "what would be the 
purpose? I 
don't know what Ship has in mind, but it could be centuries before we made 
planetfall again." 
"You could stop and drop him off." 
"You could," said Horton. "I could. Nicodemus could. But not Ship. Ship, I would 
suspect, takes 
a longer view. And what makes you think we'd find another planet that he could 
survive on--a 
dozen years from now, a hundred years from now! Ship spent a thousand years in 
space before we 
found this one. You must remember that Ship is an under-light-speed vessel." 
"You are right," said Elayne. "I keep forgetting. During the time of the 
depression, when the 

49
humans fled from Earth, they went out in all directions." 
"Using faster-than-light." 
"No, not faster-than-light. Time-jump ships. Don't ask me how they worked. But 
you get the 
idea... 
"A glimmer," Horton said. 
"And even so," she said, "they traveled many light-years to find terrestrial 
planets. Some 
disappeared--into vast distances, into time, out of this universe, there is no 
way to know. They've 
not been heard of since." 
"So you see," said Horton, "how impossible this matter of Carnivore becomes." 
"Perhaps we still can solve the tunnel problem. That is what Carnivore really 
wants. That is what I 
want." 
"I'm out of all approaches," said Nicodemus. "I have no new ideas. We are not 
dealing with a 
simple situation of someone simply closing a world. They went to a lot of work 
to keep it closed. 
The hardness of this rock isn't natural. No rock could be that hard. Someone 
made it hard. They 
recognized that someone might try to tamper with the panel and took steps 
against it." 
"There must be something here," said Horton. "Some reason for blocking the 
tunnel off. A 
treasure, perhaps." 
"Not a treasure," said Elayne. "They'd have taken a treasure with them. A 
danger, more than 
likely." 
"Someone who hid something here for safekeeping." 
"I don't think so," said Nicodemus. "Someday they'd want to recover it. They 
could reach it, of 
course, but how would they get it out?" 
"They could come by ship," said Horton. 
"That would be unlikely," said Elayne. "The better answer is they'd know how to 
bypass the 
block." 
"You think there's a way to do it, then?" 
"I'm inclined to think there might be, but that doesn't mean that we can find 
it." 
"Then, again," said Nicodemus, "it may be a simple matter of blocking the tunnel 
so that 
something that is here cannot get out. Penning it in from the rest of the tunnel 
planets." 
"But if that's the case," asked Horton, "what could it be? Would you think our 
creature in the 
cube?" 
"That might be it," she said. "Imprisoned not only in the cube, but restricted 
to the planet. A 
second defense against it if it ever was able to escape the cube. Although it is 
hard, somehow, to 
think so. It is such a pretty thing." 
"It could be pretty and still be dangerous." 
"What's this cube creature?" asked Nicodemus. "I've not heard of it." 
"Elayne and I found it in a building in the city. Some sort of thing enclosed in 
a cube." 
"Alive?" 
"We can't be certain, but I think it is. I had the feeling that it is. Elayne 
was able to sense it." 
"And the cube? What is the cube made of?" 
"A strange material," said Elayne, "if it is a material. It stops you, but you 
can't feel it. It's as if it 
weren't there." 
Nicodemus began to pick up the tools scattered on the flat rock floor of the 
path. 
"You're giving up," said Horton. 
"I might as well. There's no more I can do. No tool I have will touch the stone. 
I can't lift off the 
panel's protective covering, be it force field or something else. I'm done until 
someone else comes 
up with a good idea." 
"Perhaps if we had a look through Shakespeare's book, we'd come up with 
something new," said 
Horton. 
"Shakespeare never came close," said Nicodemus. "The best that he could do was 
kick the tunnel 
and do a lot of cussing." 
"I didn't mean we'd find any worthwhile ideas," said Horton. "At the best, an 
observation, the 

50
implications of which slipped past Shakespeare." 
Nicodemus was doubtful. "Maybe so," he said. "But we can't do much reading with 
Carnivore 
around. He'll want to know what Shakespeare wrote, and some of the things that 
Shakespeare wrote 
were not too complimentary to his old pal." 
"But Carnivore's not here," Elayne pointed out. "Did he say where he was going 
when you 
chased him off?" 
"He said a walkabout. He mumbled something about magic. I gained the impression, 
none too 
clearly, that he wanted to collect certain magic stuff--leaves, roots, barks." 
"He spoke of magic earlier," said Horton. "Some idea that we could combine our 
magics." 
Elayne asked, "Have you any magics?" 
"No," Horton said, "we haven't." 
"Then you must not sneer at those who have." 
"You mean you believe in magic?" 
Elayne crinkled her brow. "I'm not sure," she said, "but I have seen a magic 
work, or seem to 
work." 
Nicodemus finished with his toolbox and closed it. 
"Let's get up to the house and see about that book," he said. 

20 
"THIS Shakespeare of yours," said Elayne, "seems to have been a philosopher, but 
a rather shaky 
one. Not at all well grounded." 
"He was a lonely and an ill and frightened man," said Horton. "He wrote whatever 
came into his 
head, without examining the logic or the fitness of it. He was writing for 
himself. Never for a 
moment did he think anyone else would ever read what he was scribbling. If he 
had thought so, he 
probably would have been more circumspect in what he wrote." 
"At least he was honest about it," she said. "Listen to this: 

Time has a certain smell. This may be no more than a conceit of mine, but I am 
sure it has. Old 
time would be sour and musty and new time, at the beginning of creation, must 
have been sweet 
and heady and exuberant. I wonder if, as events proceed toward their unknowable 
end, we may 
not become polluted with the acrid scent of ancient time, in the same manner and 
to the same end 
as olden Earth was polluted by the spew of factory chimneys and the foulness of 
toxic gases. Does 
the death of the universe lie in time pollution, in the thickening of old time 
smell until no life can 
exist upon any of the bodies that make up the cosmos, perhaps eroding the very 
matter of the 
universe itself into a foul corruption? Will this corruption so clog the 
physical processes operative 
in the universe that they will cease to function and chaos will result? And if 
this should be the 
case, what would chaos bring? Not necessarily the end of the universe since 
chaos in itself is a 
negation of all physics and all chemistry, perhaps allowing for new and 
unimaginable combina-
tions which would violate all previous conceptions, giving rise to a 
disorderliness and an 
imprecision which would make possible certain events that science now tells us 
are unthinkable. 

"And he goes on:" 

This may have been the situation--I was first inclined to say a time and that 
would have been a 
contradiction in terms--when, before the universe came into being, there was 
neither time nor 
space and, as well, no referrents for that great mass of somethingness waiting 
to explode so our 
universe could come into existence; It is impossible, of course, for the human 
mind to imagine a 
situation where there'd have been neither time or space except as each 
potentially existed in that 
cosmic egg, itself a mystery that is impossible for one to visualize. And yet, 
intellectually, one 
does know a situation such as this did exist if our scientific thinking is 
correct. Still, the thought 
occurs--if there were neither time nor space, in what sort of medium did the 
cosmic egg exist? 


51
"Provocative," said Nicodemus, "but still it gives us no information, nothing 
that we need to 
know. The man writes as if he were living in a vacuum. He could write that sort 
of drivel anywhere 
at all. Only occasionally does he mention this planet, with parenthetical dirty 
digs at the Carnivore." 
"He was trying to forget this planet," said Horton, "trying to retire within 
himself so that he could 
disregard it. He was, in effect, attempting to create a pseudo-world that would 
give him something 
other than this planet." 
"For some reason," said Elayne, "he was concerned about pollution. Here is 
something else he 
wrote about it: 

The emergence of intelligence, I am convinced, tends to unbalance the ecology. 
In other words, 
intelligence is the great polluter. It is not until a creature begins to manage 
its environment that 
nature is thrown into disorder. Until that occurs, there is a system of checks 
and balances 
operating in a logical and understandable manner. Intelligence destroys and 
modifies the checks 
and balances even as it tries very diligently to leave them as they were. There 
is no such thing as 
an intelligence living in harmony with the biosphere. It may think and boast it 
is doing so, but its 
mentality gives it an advantage, and the compulsion is always there to employ 
this advantage to 
its selfish benefit. Thus, while intelligence may be an outstanding survival 
factor, the factor is 
short-term, and intelligence turns out instead to be the great destroyer. 

She flipped the pages, eyeing the entries briefly. "It's so much fun reading the 
elder tongue," she 
said. "I was not sure I could." 
"Shakespeare's penmanship was not of the best," said Horton. 
"Still good enough to read," she said, "once you get the hang of it. Here's 
something strange. He's 
writing about the god-hour. That's a strange expression." 
"It's real enough," said Horton. "At least here it's real. I should have told 
you of it. It is something 
that reaches out and grabs you and lays you absolutely open. Except for 
Nicodemus. Nicodemus 
barely reacts to it. It seems to originate elsewhere than this planet. Carnivore 
said that Shakespeare 
thought it came from some point far in space. What does he say about it?" 
"Apparently he was writing about it after a long experience with it," she said. 
"Here is what be 
writes:" 

I feel that I may finally have come to terms with this phenomenon that I have 
termed, for lack of 
a better description, the god-hour. Carnivore, poor soul, still resents and 
fears it, and I suppose I 
fear it, too, although by this time, having lived with it for many years and 
learning that there is no 
way one may hide from it or insulate oneself from it, I have reached some 
acceptance of it as 
something from which there is no escape, but likewise as something that can, for 
a time, take a 
man outside himself and expose him to the universe, although, truth to tell, if 
it were optional, one 
would hesitate to thus have himself exposed too often. 
The trouble is, of course, that one sees and experiences too much, most of 
which--nay, all of 
which--he does not understand and is left, after the event, holding onto only 
the ragged edge of it, 
with the horrifying wonderment as to whether a human mentality is equipped and 
capable of 
understanding more than a modicum of that to which he has been exposed. I have 
wondered at 
times if it could be a deliberate teaching mechanism, but if it is, it is an 
over-education, a throwing 
of massive scholarly texts at a stupid student who has not been grounded in the 
basic funda-
mentals of what he is being taught and thus incapable of even feebly grasping at 
the principles 
which are necessary for even a shadowy understanding. 
I have wondered, I say, but wonder is about as far as this particular thought 
has ever gotten. As 
time went on, I became more and more of the opinion that in the god-hour I was 
experiencing 
something that was not intended for me at all, nor for any human--that the 
god-hour, whatever it 
may be, emanates from some sort of entity that is entirely unaware that such a 
thing as a human 
may exist, which might be caught up in cosmic laughter were it to learn that 
such a thing as I am 
did exist. I am, I had become convinced, simply caught up in the shotgun effect 
of it, sprayed by 

52
some stray pellets that were aimed at bigger game. 
But no sooner had I become convinced of this than I was made acutely aware that 
the source of 
the god-hour somehow had at least marginally became aware of me and had somehow 
managed to 
dig deep into my memory or my psyche, for at times, instead of being laid open 
to the cosmos, I 
was laid open to myself, laid open to the past, and for a period of unknown 
duration lived over 
again, with certain distortions, events of the past which almost invariably were 
distasteful in the 
extreme, moments snatched out of the muck of my mind, where they had lain deeply 
buried, 
where in shame and regret I would have wished to keep them buried, but now dug 
up and spread 
out before me while I squirm in embarrassment and indignity at the sight of 
them, forced to live 
again certain parts of my life that I had hid away, not only from the ken of 
others, but of myself as 
well. And even worse than that, certain fantasies that in unguarded moments I 
had dreamed in my 
secret soul and been horrified when I found what I had been dreaming. And these, 
too, are 
dragged squealing from my subconscious and paraded in an unpitying light before 
me. I don't 
know which is worse, the opening to the universe, or the unlocking of the 
secrets of myself. 
So I became aware that somehow the god-hour had become aware of me--perhaps not 
actually 
of me as a person, but as some fleck of obscene and disgusting matter and had 
flicked at me in 
irritation that such a thing as I should be there, not taking the time to really 
do me any harm, not 
squashing me as I might squash an insect, but simply brushing me, or trying to 
brush me, to one 
side. And I took some courage, strangely, from this, for if the god-hour is only 
marginally aware 
of me, then I told myself I stand in no actual danger from it. And if it pays so 
slight attention to 
me, then surely it must be seeking bigger game than I and the terrifying part of 
this is that it 
seemed to me that this bigger game must be here, upon this planet. Not on this 
planet only, but on 
this particular segment of the planet--it must be very near to us. 
I have wracked my brains in an effort to imagine what it might be and if it 
still is here. Was the 
god-hour intended for the people who inhabited the now-deserted city, and if 
this should be the 
case, how is it that the agency which is responsible for the god-hour does not 
know that they are 
gone? The more I think of it, the more convinced I become that the people of the 
city did not 
supply the target, that the god-hour still is aimed at something that is still 
here. I look for what it 
may be, and I have no idea. I am haunted by the feeling that I look upon the 
target day after day 
and do not recognize it. It is a frustrating and an eerie sensation to be 
thinking this. One feels out 
of touch and stupid and, at times, more than a little frightened. If a man can 
be so out of touch 
with reality, so blind to actuality, so insensitive to his surroundings, then 
the human race, in all 
truth, is more unfit and feeble than we have sometimes thought. 

As she came to the end of what Shakespeare had written, Elayne raised her head 
from the page 
and looked at Horton. "Do you agree?" she asked. "Did you have some of the same 
reactions?" 
"I've gone through it only twice," Horton told her. "The sum total of my 
reactions so far is a vast 
bewilderment." 
"Shakespeare says it is inescapable. He says there is no way to hide from it." 
"Carnivore hides from it," said Nicodemus. "He gets under cover. He says it's 
not so bad when 
you are under cover." 
"You'll know in a few hours more," said Horton." I have a hunch it's easier if 
you don't try to 
fight it. There is no way it can be described. You must experience it to know." 
Elayne laughed, a little nervously. "I can hardly wait," she said. 

21 
CARNIVORE came clumping in an hour before sunset. Nicodemus had cut steaks and 
was 
squatting, broiling them, He motioned at a huge chunk of meat he had laid upon a 
bed of leaves 
pulled off a nearby tree. 
"That's for you," he said. "1 picked a choicest cut." 
"Nourishment," said Carnivore, "is a thing I stand in need of. I thank you from 
my gut." 
He picked up the chunk of meat in both his hands and hunkered down in front of 
the woodpile on 

53
which the other two were seated. He lifted it to his face and bit vigorously 
into it. Blood spouted on 
his whiskers. 
Chomping vigorously, he looked up at his two companions. 
"I do not bother you, I hope," he said, "with my unseemly eating. I hunger 
greatly. Perhaps I 
should have waited." 
"Not at all," said Elayne. "Go ahead and eat. Ours will be ready in a little 
time." She gazed in sick 
fascination at his bloody chops, the blood running down his tentacles. 
"You like good red meat?" he asked. 
"I'll get used to it," she said. 
"You don't really have to," said Horton. "Nicodemus could find you something 
else." 
She shook her head. "When you travel world to world, you find many customs that 
are strange to 
you. Some that may even be a shock to your prejudice. But, in my way of life, 
there can be no 
prejudice. Your mind must stay open and receptive--you must force it to stay 
open." 
"And this is what you're doing by eating meat with us?" 
"Well, it was to start with and I suppose it is still a little. But without half 
trying, I think I could 
develop a fondness for the flesh." She said to Nicodemus, "Could you make sure 
that mine is on the 
well-done side?" 
"I already have," said Nicodemus. "I started yours well ahead of Carter's." 
"I have been told many times by my old friend Shakespeare," said Carnivore, 
"that I am an 
unmitigated slob, with no manners worth the mentioning, and dripping, filthy 
habits. I am, to tell 
you truth, devastated at such evaluation, but I am too long in the tooth to 
change my way of life, 
and I would, on no account, become a mincing dandy. If I be a slob, I shall 
enjoy being one, for 
slobbishness is a comfortable situation in which to find oneself." 
"You're a slob, all right," said Horton, "but if it makes you happy, pay us no 
attention." 
"Thankful I am for your graciousness," said Carnivore, "and happy I do not have 
to change. 
Change is hard for me to do." He said to Nicodemus, "You have the tunnel nearly 
done?" 
"Not only is it not nearly done," said Nicodemus, "but now I'm fairly sure it 
will not be done." 
"You mean fix it you cannot?" 
"That's exactly what I mean unless someone comes up with a bright idea." 
"Oh, well," said Carnivore, "while hope forever springs inside the gut, I am not 
surprised. I 
walked for long today with myself communing, and I told myself too much I should 
not expect. I 
say to myself that life has not been hard on me and many happinesses I've had, 
and that in view of 
this, I should not gag at some wrong events. And I sought within my mind 
alternatives. It seemed to 
me that magic might be a way to try. You say to me, Carter Horton, that you do 
not trust nor 
understand the magic. You and Shakespeare are the same. He make heavy fun of 
magic. He say it 
no damn good. Perhaps our newest compatriot may not think so strongly." He 
looked appealingly at 
Elayne. 
She asked, "Have you tried your magic?" 
"That I have," he told her, "but against Shakespeare's scornful hooting. The 
hooting, I tell myself, 
take the edge off it, reduce it down to nothing." 
"I don't know about that," said Elayne, "but I'm sure it would do no good." 
Carnivore nodded sagely, "Then I say to myself, if magic fails, if the robot 
fails, if all else fails, 
what am I to do? Remain upon this planet? Surely not, I say. Surely these new 
friends of mine will 
find a place for me when off this world they fly into deeper space." 
"Now you're leaning on us," Nicodemus said. "Go ahead and bawl. Roll on the 
ground and kick 
your heels and scream. It won't do you any good. We can't put you in cold-sleep 
and. . ." 
"At least," said Carnivore, "I am with friends. Until I die, I am with friends 
and away from here. I 
take little space. I huddle in one corner. I eat very little. I am not in the 
way. I will keep my mouth 
shut." 
"That will be the day," said Nicodemus. 
"It's up to Ship," said Horton. "I will talk with Ship about it. But I can hold 
out no hope." 
"You comprehend," said Carnivore, "that I am a warrior. There is but one way for 
a warrior to 

54
die, in the bloodiness of fighting. That is how I want to die. But that may not 
be the way of it with 
me. To fate, I bow my head. What I do not want is die here, with no one to see 
me die, to think poor 
Carnivore, he is gone, to crawl out my last days in the loathesome nothingness 
of this place passed 
by in time. . ." 
"That's it," said Elayne, suddenly. "Time. That is what I should have thought of 
right at first." 
Horton looked at her in astonishment. "Time? What are you talking about? What 
has time to do 
with it?" 
"The cube," she said. "The cube we found in the city. With the creature in it. 
That cube is frozen 
time." 
"Frozen time!" said Nicodemus. "Time can't be frozen. You freeze people and food 
and other 
things. Time you do not freeze." 
"Arrested time," she said. "There are stories--legends-- that it can be done. 
Time flows. It 
moves. Stop its flow and movement. No past, no future, just the present. An 
everlasting present. A 
present existing from the past and embedded in the future that now has become 
the present." 
"You sound like the Shakespeare," grumbled Carnivore. "Always spouting 
foolishness. Always 
yak, yak, yak. Saying things with no sense in them. Just to hear his talk." 
"No, it's not that at all," insisted Elayne. "I tell you the truth. There are 
stories on many planets 
that time can be manipulated, that there are ways to do it. No one can say who 
does it. . ." 
"Perhaps the tunnel people." 
"There never is a name. Just that it can be done." 
"But why here? Why with the creature frozen into time?" 
"Perhaps to wait," she said. "Perhaps so it will be here when the need for it 
arises. Perhaps the 
ones who put the creature into time could not know when that need would come. . 
." 
"So it's waited through the centuries," said Horton, "with millennia still to 
wait. . ." 
"But don't you see," she said. "Centuries or millennia, it would be all the 
same. Frozen as it is, it 
has no time experience. It exists and continues to exist within that frozen 
microsecond . . ." 
The god-hour struck. 

22 
FOR a moment, Horton was spattered across the universe, with the same sickening 
sense of 
endlessness that he had felt before; then the spattering came together and the 
universe was 
narrowed, and all sense of strangeness ceased. There was coordinated time and 
space again, neatly 
tied together, and he knew where he was, except there seemed to be two of him, 
although the 
twoness of him seemed not inconvenient and even natural. 
He crouched in the warm black loam between two rows of vegetables. Ahead of him, 
the two 
rows went on and on, two green lines with a strip of black between them. To the 
left and right, there 
were innumerable other parallel green lines with the black lines between 
them--although he had to 
imagine the black lines, for the greenness of the green lines merged together 
and on either side, 
there was only a dark green carpet. 
Squatting on his heels, feeling the warmth of the soil against his bare feet, he 
looked back over his 
shoulder and behind him the green carpet ended, very far away, against the 
uplift of a structure that 
towered so high its top was lost in a white puffy cloud pegged against the 
blueness of the sky. 
He reached out his little boy's hands and picked the beans that hung heavily on 
the plants, using 
his left hand to pull the bushes apart so he could reach the pods entangled in 
the foliage, picking 
them with his right hand and dropping them into a half-filled basket sitting in 
the black loam strip 
just in front of him. 
Now he saw what he had not seen before, that at regular intervals between rows, 
ahead of him 
other baskets waited, empty baskets waiting to be filled, placed there by rough 
calculation of when 
one basket would be filled and another needed. And back of him other baskets, 
already filled and 
waiting for the vehicle which later on would move along the rows to collect the 
baskets filled with 
beans. 
Something else he had not realized before--that he was not alone in the field, 
but that there were 

55
many others with him, most of them children, although some were old men and 
women. Some of 
them were ahead of him, being faster, or perhaps less careful, pickers, others 
behind him. 
Clouds flecked the sky, fleecy, lazy clouds, but at the moment none covered the 
sun and it shone 
down with a fierce warmth that he could feel striking through the thinness of 
his shirt. He crawled 
along the row, picking as he went, being conscientious in his work, leaving some 
of the smaller 
pods to mature for another day or two, picking all the others with the sun upon 
his back, sweat 
starting in his armpits and running down his ribs, the softness and the warmth 
of the well-broken, 
cultivated soil pressing on his feet. His mind held in neutral, clinging to the 
present, neither moving 
back nor forth in time, content in the present moment, as if he were a simple 
organism which 
absorbed the warmth and in some strange way drew nourishment from the soil, as 
had the beans he 
picked. 
But there was more than that. There was the boy, perhaps nine or ten, and there 
was, as well, the 
present Carter Horton, a seemingly invisible second person, who stood to one 
side, or was 
positioned somewhere else, who watched the boy he once had been, feeling and 
thinking and 
experiencing what he once had known, almost as if he were the boy. But knowing 
more than the 
boy knew, knowing what the boy could not even guess, aware of the years and 
events which lay 
between this expansive bean field and a time a thousand light-years into space. 
Knowing, as the boy 
could not know, that men and women in the great, distant structure which rose at 
one end of the 
field, and in many other similar structures in the world, had recognized the 
seeds of another crisis-
point and, even then, were planning its solution. 
Strange, he thought, that even given a second chance, the human race still must 
come upon its 
crisis-points and realize at last that the only solution lay in other possible 
planets in other 
hypothetical solar systems, where men once more could make other starts, some of 
these starts 
failing, but some, perhaps, succeeding. 
Less than five centuries before this morning in the bean patch, the Earth had 
faltered to a halt, not 
in war, but in worldwide economic collapse. With the profit and free-enterprise 
system finally 
buckling under the cracks which had begun to be apparent early in the twentieth 
century, with a 
large fraction of the world's more basic natural resources gone, with population 
soaring, with 
industry introducing more and more technological labor-saving devices, with food 
surpluses no 
longer stretching far enough to feed the people of the world--with all of these, 
famine, 
unemployment, inflation, and a lack of confidence in world leadership had 
resulted. Government 
had disappeared; industry, communications and trade had ground to a halt and, 
for a time, there had 
been anarchy and chaos. 
Out of this anarchy had risen another way of life, put together, not by 
politicians and statesmen, 
but by economists and sociologists. But in a few hundred years, this new society 
had exhibited 
symptoms which had sent the scientists to their laboratories and engineers to 
their drafting boards to 
design the starships that would transplant the human race to space. The symptoms 
had not been 
misread, the second, the invisible Horton told himself, for on this very day 
(which day? this day or 
another day?) Elayne had told him of the final collapse of the way of life the 
economists and 
sociologists had carpentered so carefully. 
Earth had been too sick, he thought, too debased, too exploited, too polluted by 
the errors of 
mankind to survive. 
He felt the soil between his toes and the little whiff of breeze that came 
across the field to blow 
against his sweat-soaked, sun-warmed back. He dropped the handful of beans that 
he had picked 
into the basket and pushed it ahead of him, bunching along, the row to reach 
other bushes in the 
seemingly never-ending row of bushes. The basket, he saw, was almost full. Just 
ahead of him was 
an empty basket. 
He was getting tired. Glancing at the sun, he saw that it was still an hour or 
more till noon when 
the lunch wagon would come driving down the rows; A half hour for lunch, he 
thought, and then 
he'd be back at the picking until the sun went down. He stretched out the 
fingers of his right hand, 
flexing them to take away the cramp and tired. He saw that the fingers were 
stained green. 
Tired and hot and beginning to get hungry and a long day yet ahead, but he had 
to keep on 

56
picking, as hundreds of others were picking--the very young and the very 
old--doing jobs that they 
could do, leaving other more capable workers free to do other jobs. He squatted 
on his heels and 
stared out across the greenness. Not only beans, he thought, but many other 
crops in season, 
produce that when the time came must be harvested to feed the people of the 
tower. 
To feed the people of the tower, thought Horton (the insubstantial, invisible 
Horton), to feed the 
tribe, the clan, the commune. My people. Our People. One for all and all for 
one. The tower built 
high, above the clouds, so that it would take little ground space, piling a city 
perpendicularly so that 
the land would be left to grow the food to feed the people of the piled-up city. 
People crowded into 
a tower because the tower, huge as it was, must be as small as possible. 
Make do. Make last. Get along without. Grow and harvest food with stoop labor 
because there 
was little fuel. Eat carbohydrates because they took less energy to grow than 
protein. Build and 
manufacture for permanence and not for obsolescence; with the profit system 
swept away, 
obsolescence had become not only criminal, but ridiculous. 
With industry gone, he thought, we grew our food, we took in one another's 
washing. We got 
along--we got along. We went back to tribal patterns, living in a monolith 
rather than a collection 
of rude huts. In time, we sneered at the olden times, at the profit system, at 
the work ethic, at private 
enterprise and all the time we sneered, there was a sickness in us--the sickness 
of humankind. No 
matter what we tried, he told himself, there was a sickness in us. Must it be 
that the human race 
cannot live in harmony with its environment? Must it, to survive, have new 
planets to rape each few 
millennia? Are we doomed to move like an invading swarm of locust across the 
galaxy, across the 
universe? Is the galaxy, the cosmos, doomed to us? Or will the day come when the 
universe will 
rise up in annoyance and slap us down--not in anger, but in annoyance? There is, 
he thought, a 
certain greatness in us, but a destructive and a selfish greatness. Earth lasted 
for a matter of two 
million years after our species first arose, but during most of those years, we 
were not effective as 
we now are effective--it took us a time to grow up to our full potential for 
destruction. But starting, 
as we are now, on other planets, how long would it take to introduce that deadly 
virus of mankind--
how long will it take the disease to run its course? 
The boy parted the bushes and was reaching out to pick the beans thus exposed. A 
worm which 
had been clinging to the leaves lost it footing and dropped off. Striking the 
ground, it rolled itself 
into a ball. Scarcely without thinking, scarcely pausing in his work, the boy 
shifted a foot, lifting it 
to come down on the worm, grinding it deep into the soil. 
A gray mist came creeping to blot out the bean field, and the great monolithic 
building that 
loomed mile-high in the distance and there, hanging in the sky, surrounded by 
the misty fog that 
swept about it in streaming tendrils was the skull of Shakespeare, looking down 
at Horton--not 
leering down at him, not grinning down at him, but regarding him most 
companionably, as if the 
flesh might still exist, as if the barrier line of death did not exist at all. 
Horton found himself speaking to the skull. "How now, old companion?" And that 
was strange, 
for Shakespeare bad never been his companion save in the general companionship 
of humanity, the 
two of them belonging to that strange and awesome race of creatures which had 
proliferated on one 
planet and then, in desperation rather than adventurously, had gone storming out 
into the galaxy-- 
going only God knew how far, for certainly, at this moment, no member of the 
race might know 
with any certainty how far the others may have gone. 
"How now, old companion?" And that was strange as well, for Horton knew that it 
was not the 
manner in which he'd ordinarily speak--almost as if he were speaking in a sort 
of Mother Goose 
adaptation of the kind of speech the original Shakespeare had used to pen his 
plays. As if he were 
not the original Carter Horton, but, as well, another Mother Goose adaptation 
mouthing rote 
sentiments to some symbolism that he once had dreamed. He raged inwardly at 
himself for being 
what he was not; but try as he could, he could not find himself again. His 
psyche was so entangled 
with the boy who crushed a worm and with a dried-bone skull case that there was 
no way he could 
find the path back to his normal self. 
"How now, old companion?" he asked. "You say we all are lost. But where lost? 
How lost? Why 
lost? Have you dug down to the basics of our lostness? Is it carried in our 
genes, or did something 

57
happen to us? Are we the only lost ones, or are there others like us? Is 
lostness an innate 
characteristic of intelligence?" 
The skull said to him, clattering its bony jaws, "We are lost. That is all I 
said. I did not go digging 
into the philosophy of it. We are lost because we lost the Earth. We are lost 
because we do not 
know where we are. We are lost because we can't find the way back home. There 
now is no place 
for us. We walk strange roads in stranger lands and along the way, there is 
nothing that makes 
sense. Once we knew some answers because we knew the questions to be asked, but 
now we can 
find no answers because we do not know the questions. When others in the galaxy 
reach out to 
make contact with us, we do not know what to say. We are, in such a situation, 
gibbering idiots who 
have not only lost our way, but our sense as well. Back there in your precious 
bean field, even at the 
age of ten, you had some sense of your purpose and where you might be going, but 
you do not have 
that same sense now." 
"No," said Horton, "I don't suppose I have." 
"You're damned right you haven't. You want some answers, do you?" 
"What kind of answers?" 
"Any kind of answers. Any kind at all are better than no answers. Go and ask the 
Pond." 
"The Pond? What could the Pond tell me? It's just a glob of dirty water." 
"It's not water. You know it isn't water." 
"That's right. It isn't water. Do you know what it is?" 
"No, I don't," said Shakespeare. 
"Did you talk with it?" 
"I never dared. Basically, I'm a coward." 
"You were afraid of the Pond?" 
"Not that. Afraid of what it might tell me." 
"But you knew something about the Pond. You figured it could talk with you. And 
yet you never 
wrote about it." 
"How can you know?" asked Shakespeare. "You have not read everything I wrote. 
But you are 
right; I never wrote about it except to say it stank. And I never wrote about it 
because I did not want 
to think about it. It gave rise to great unease in me. It was more than just a 
pond. Even had it been 
no more than water, it would have been more than just a pond." 
"But why unease?" asked Horton. "Why did you feel that way about it?" 
"Man prides himself upon his intellect," said Shakespeare. "He glorifies in his 
reason and his 
logic. But these are new things, very lately come by. Before that, he had 
something else. It was this 
something else that told me. Call it a gut feeling; call it intuition; call it 
any fancy name you wish. 
Our prehistoric ancestors had it, and it served them well. They knew, but could 
not tell you how 
they knew. They knew what to be afraid of and that, at the bottom of it, is what 
any species must 
have if it is to survive. What to be afraid of, what to walk around, what to 
leave alone. If you have 
that, you'll live; if you don't, you won't." 
"Is this your spirit talking to me? Your shade? Your ghost?" 
"First tell me this," said the skull, clattering its jaws with the two teeth 
missing. "First tell me 
what is life and what is death, and then I'll answer you about the spirit and 
the shade." 

23 
THE Shakespeare skull hung above the doorway, grinning down at them--and a 
moment before, 
Horton told himself, it had not been grinning. It had been talking with him as 
another man might 
talk. It had been strange, but it had not been horrible, and it had not grinned. 
Its two missing teeth 
had been no more than missing teeth, but now they had about them a macabre 
quality that was 
unsettling. Evening dusk had fallen, and the flicker of the fire reflecting off 
the polished bone made 
it seem that the jaws might still be moving and lent a blinking to the deep 
darkness of the sockets 
where once the eyes had been. 
"Well," said Nicodemus, staring at the steaks, "this business of the god-hour 
has messed my 
cooking most atrociously. These slabs of meat are burned almost to a crisp." 

58
"It's all right," said Horton. "I like my eating rare, but it doesn't matter 
that much." 
Beside Horton, Elayne seemed to be emerging from a trance. "Why didn't you tell 
me?" she 
asked, accusingly. "Why didn't you let me in on what it would be like?" 
"There is no way," said Carnivore. "How can you tell the shriveling of the gut . 
. ." 
"What was it like?" asked Horton. 
"Frightening," she- said. "But wonderful as well. As if someone had taken you to 
some great 
cosmic mountaintop, with the universe all spread out before you--all the glory 
and the wonder, all 
the sadness. All the love and hate, all the compassion and not-caring. You stand 
there, frail and 
blown by the wind that sweeps the worlds and, at first, you are lonely and 
confused and you feel as 
if you are someplace you are not meant to be, but you remember then that you did 
not aspire to be 
there, but were somehow brought there and then it seems all right. You know what 
you are looking 
at, and it does not look anyway at all the way you would have imagined that it 
would--if, in fact, 
you ever had imagined that you'd see it, which you never did, of course. You 
stand and stare at it, at 
first with no comprehension and then, slowly, you begin to comprehend just a 
little, as if someone 
were telling you what it was all about. And, at last, you begin to understand, 
using truths you had 
not known existed, and you're about ready to say to yourself so that's the way 
it is and then, before 
you can say it to yourself, it all is gone. Just when you feel that you are 
ready to grasp some 
meaning of it, then it all is gone." 
That was the way it was, thought Horton--or at least that was the way it had 
been. But this time, 
for him, it had been different, as Shakespeare had written; it could be 
different, And the logic of that 
difference, the reason for that difference? 
"I timed it this time," said Nicodemus. "It ran slightly under a quarter of an 
hour. Did it seem that 
long?" 
"Longer," said Elayne. "It seemed to last forever." 
Nicodemus looked questioningly at Horton. "I don't know," said Horton. "I had no 
very clear 
impression of time." 
The conversation with Shakespeare had not lasted too long, but when he tried to 
calculate, in 
memory, how long he had been in the bean field, he could not even make a guess. 
"It was the same for you?" asked Elayne. "You saw much the same I did? This was 
what you 
could not describe to me?" 
"This time it was different. I went back to my boyhood." 
"And that was all?" asked Elayne. "Just back to your boyhood?" 
"That was all," said Horton.- He could not bring himself to tell of his 
conversation with the skull. 
It had an odd sound to it and more than likely, Carnivore would panic at the 
telling. It was better, he 
decided, to simply let it lie. 
"The thing I want," said Carnivore, "is this god-hour to tell us how to fix the 
tunnel. You are quite 
sure," he said to Nicodemus, "that no farther you can go." 
"I can't imagine what," said Nicodemus. "I tried to get the cover off the 
control, and that seems 
impossible. I tried to chisel out the control, and that rock is hard as steel. 
The chisel bounces off it. 
It's not just ordinary rock. In some way, it has been metamorphosed." 
"Magic we could try. Among the four of us. . ." "I know no magic," Nicodemus 
told him. 
"Nor do I," said Horton. 
"I know some," said Carnivore, "and perhaps m'lady." 
"What kind of magic, Carnivore?" 
"Root magic, herb magic, dancing magic." 
"Those all are primitive," said Elayne. "They have but small effect." 
"By the very nature of it, all magic is primitive," said Nicodemus. "It is the 
appeal of the ignorant 
to powers that are suspected, but of which no one is sure." 
"Not necessarily so," said Elayne. "I know of peoples who have workable 
magic--magic you can 
count on. Based, I think, on mathematics." 
"But not our kind of mathematics," said Horton. 
"That is right. Not our kind of mathematics." 

59
"But you don't know this magic," said Carnivore. "The mathematics you don't 
have." 
"I'm sorry, Carnivore. I have no inkling of them." 
"You put down my magic," howled Carnivore. "You, all of you, put me down most 
snottily. At 
my simple magic, of roots and leaves and barks, you sneer with quiet 
accomplishment. Then you 
tell me of other magic that might have a chance to work, that might open wide 
the tunnel, but you 
do not know this magic." 
"Once again," Elayne told him, "I am very sorry. I wish, for your sake, I did 
have the magic. But 
we are here and it is somewhere else, and even if I could go in search of it, to 
find those who could 
manipulate it, I am not sure that I could interest them in such a project. For 
they, undoubtedly, 
would be very supercilious people and no easy folks to talk with." 
"No one," said Carnivore, with feeling, "really gives a damn. You, all three of 
you, can go back to 
the ship. . ." 
"We could go back to the tunnel in the morning," said Nicodemus, "and have 
another look at it. 
We might see something we have missed. After all, I spent all my time on the 
control panel, and no 
one paid attention to the tunnel itself. We might find something there." 
"You'd do this?" asked Carnivore. "You'd really do it for good old Carnivore?" 
"Yes," said Nicodemus. "For good old Carnivore." 
And now, thought Horton, this is the end of it. They'd go out tomorrow morning 
and inspect the 
tunnel once again. Finding nothing, there'd be no more they could do--although, 
come to think of 
it, that was wrongly phrased; up to the moment, they'd done exactly nothing. 
After several thousand 
years, if one took Elayne's fates at face value, they had finally reached a 
planet where a man could 
live, and then had gone rushing off on a rescue mission which had come to 
nothing. It was illogical 
for him to be thinking this, he told himself, but it was the truth. The only 
thing of value they had 
found had been the emeralds and, in their situation, the emeralds were not worth 
the picking off the 
ground. Although, perhaps, on second thought, they had found something that 
might be worth the 
time expended. But it was something, on the face of it, to which they could lay 
no claim. By all that 
was right and proper, Carnivore must be the heir of Shakespeare, and this would 
mean that the 
Shakespeare volume must belong to him. 
He glanced up at the skull affixed above the door. I would like that book, he 
told the skull, 
speaking in his mind. I'd like to settle down and read it, try to live the days 
of your exile, to judge 
the madness and the wisdom in you, finding, no doubt, more wisdom than madness, 
for even in 
madness there may, at times, be wisdom, try to correlate chronologically the 
paragraphs and 
snatches that you wrote so haphazardly, to find the kind of man you were and how 
you came to 
terms with loneliness and death. 
Did I really talk with you? he asked the skull. Did you reach out beyond the 
death-dimension to 
establish contact with me, perhaps specifically to tell me about the Pond? Or 
was it simply a 
reaching out to anyone, any other intellectual blob, that was in a position to 
suspend a natural 
disbelief and to thus be able to talk with you? Ask the Pond, you said. And how 
do you ask the 
Pond? Do you walk up to the Pond and say, Shakespeare said I could talk with 
you--so go ahead 
and talk? And what do you really know about the Pond? Could there have been more 
than you 
wished to tell me, but did not have the time to do it? It is safe to ask you all 
this now, for you cannot 
answer. Although, it helps one to believe that he talked with you by now 
bombarding you with a 
flurry of questions that one knows will not be answered, not by a thing of 
weathering bone pegged 
above a doorway. 
You told Carnivore none of this, but then you'd not have told Carnivore; for in 
your madness, you 
must have feared him even more than you allowed your writing to reveal. You were 
a strange man, 
Shakespeare, and I'm sorry that I could not know you, but perhaps I know you 
now. Perhaps I know 
you better than I would have known you in the flesh. Perhaps even better than 
Carnivore could have 
known you, for I'm a human and Carnivore was not. 
And Carnivore? Yes, what of Carnivore? For now it was at an end and someone must 
make some 
decision on what they were to do for Carnivore. Carnivore--the poor damn slob, 
the unlovable and 
disgusting, and yet something must be done for him. After raising up his hopes, 
they could not 

60
simply walk away and leave him here. Ship--he should have asked Ship about it, 
but he had been 
afraid to. He'd not even tried to contact Ship, for if he did, when he did, the 
matter of Carnivore 
would come up and he knew the answer. It was an answer that he didn't want to 
hear, one that he 
couldn't bear to hear. 
"That pond stinks hard tonight," said Carnivore. "There are times when it stinks 
more than others, 
and when the wind is right, there is no living with it." 
As the words penetrated his consciousness, Horton again became aware of the 
others seated about 
the fire, with the Shakespeare skull no more than a splotch of whiteness hung 
above the door. 
The stench was there, the foul rottenness of the Pond, and out beyond the circle 
of the campfire-
light came a swishing sound. The others heard it and their heads turned to stare 
in the direction from 
which the sound had come. Listening hard for the sound to repeat itself, no one 
spoke. 
The sound came again and now there was a sense of movement in the outer 
darkness, as if a part 
of the darkness had moved, not a movement one could see, but a sense of 
movement. A small part 
of the darkness took on a sheen, as if one small facet of the darkness had 
become a mirror and was 
reflecting back the firelight. 
The sheen grew larger and there was now an unmistakable movement in the 
darkness--a sphere 
of deeper dark that was rolling closer, swishing as it came. 
First there had been only a hint of it, then a sensing of it, and now, quite 
suddenly and 
unmistakably, it revealed itself--a sphere of darkness, two feet or so in 
diameter, that came rolling 
from the night into the circle of the firelight. The stench came with it--a 
deepening stench that 
seemed, however, as the sphere came closer, to lose some of its pungency. 
Ten feet from the fire, it stopped and waited, a black ball that held within 
itself an oily gleam. It 
simply sat there. It was motionless. There was no quiver, no pulsation, no sign 
that it had ever 
moved or was capable of movement. 
"It's the Pond," said Nicodemus, speaking quietly as if he did not wish to 
disturb or frighten it. 
"It's from the Pond. A part of the Pond come visiting." 
There was tension and fear within the group, but not, Horton told himself, an 
overriding fear--
rather a shocked and wondering fear. Almost, he thought, as if the sphere was 
being very 
circumspect to hold down their fear. 
"It's not water," said Horton. "I was there today. It is heavier than water. 
Like mercury, but it isn't 
mercury." 
"Then a part of it could make itself into a ball," said Elayne. 
"Alive the damn thing is," squeaked Carnivore. "It lies there, knowing of us, 
spying on us. 
Shakespeare say something wrong with Pond. He afraid of it. He go nowhere near 
it. Shakespeare 
be most accomplished coward. He say at times that in cowardliness lies a depth 
of wisdom." 
"There is a lot going on," said Nicodemus, "that we don't understand. The 
blocked tunnel, the 
creature encased in time, and now this. I have a feeling that something is about 
to happen." 
"How about it?" Horton asked the sphere. "Is there something that is about to 
happen? Have you 
come to tell us?" 
The sphere made no sound. It did not stir. It simply sat and waited. 
Nicodemus took a step toward it. 
"Leave it alone," said Horton, sharply. 
Nicodemus halted. 
The silence held. There was nothing to be done, nothing to be said. The Pond was 
here; the next 
move was up to it. 
The sphere stirred, quivering, and then it was retreating, rolling back into the 
darkness until there 
was no sign of it, although long after it had disappeared, it seemed to Horton 
that he could still see 
it. It sloshed and rustled as it moved and this sound finally died out with 
distance and the stench, to 
which they had grown somewhat accustomed, began to clear away. 
Nicodemus came back to the fire and squatted down beside it. 
"What was that all about?" he asked. 
"A look it wanted of us," wailed Carnivore. "It came to have a look." 

61
"But why?" asked Elayne. "Why would it want to have a look at us?" 
"Who can know what a Pond may want," said Nicodemus. "There's one way to find 
out," said 
Horton. "I'll go and ask the Pond." 
"That's the craziest thing I have ever heard," said Nicodemus. "This place must 
be getting to 
you." 
"I don't think it's crazy," said Elayne. "The Pond came visiting. I'll go with 
you." 
"No, you won't," said Horton. "I'm the only one to go. You all stay here. No one 
goes with me 
and no one follows. Is that understood?" 
"Now, look, Carter," said Nicodemus, "you can't just go rushing off. . ." 
"Let him go," growled Carnivore. "It is nice to know that all humans aren't like 
my cowardly 
friend there above the door". 
He lurched to his feet and threw a rough almost mocking salute to Horton "Go my 
warrior friend 
Go to meet the foe." 

24 
HE got lost twice, missing turns in the path, but finally reached the pond, 
clambering down the 
steep incline above its edge, the light of the torch reflecting off the hard 
polish of its surface. 
The night was deathly quiet. The Pond lay flat and dead. A scattering of 
unfamiliar stars dusted 
the sky. Looking behind him, Horton could see the glow of the campfire lighting 
up a tall treetop. 
He planted has heels on the shelving stone that led down to the Pond and 
hunkered low. 
"All right" he said speaking both with tongue and mind, "let's have it." 
He waited and at seemed to him there was a slight stirring in the Pond, a 
rippling that was not 
quite a ripple and from the farther shore came a whisper like wind blowing 
gently in a patch of 
reeds. He felt as well a stirring in his mind, a sense that there was something 
building in it. 
He waited and now the thing was no longer in his brain, but by some shifting of 
certain 
coordinates of which he had no knowledge, aside from thinking that there must be 
coordinates 
involved, he seemed to become displaced. He was hanging, it seemed, as a 
disembodied being, in 
some unknown emptiness which contained a single object, a blue sphere that 
gleamed in the glare 
of sunlight that came over his left shoulder, or where his left shoulder should 
have been, for he 
could not be certain he even had a body. 
The sphere was either moving toward him or he was falling toward it--which it 
was, he could not 
be certain. But, in any case, it was growing larger. As it grew, the blueness of 
its surface became 
mottled with ragged patches of whiteness, and he knew the sphere to be a planet 
with parts of its 
surface obscured by clouds which until now had been masked by the intense 
blueness of its surface. 
Now there was no question he was falling through the atmosphere of the planet, 
although the fall 
seemed so controlled that he felt no apprehension. It was not like a fall, but 
rather a wafting 
downward, like a thistledown floating in the air. The sphere as such had 
disappeared, its disc 
become so large that it filled and overran his field of vision. Below him now 
lay the great plain of 
blueness with the brushed-in whiteness of the clouds. Clouds, but no other 
pattern, no sign of a 
continental mass. 
He was moving faster now, plunging downward, but the illusion of thistledown 
still held. As he 
came closer to the surface, he could see that the blueness was ruffled--water 
set in motion by the 
raging of a wind that swept across it. 
Not water, something said to him. Liquid, but not water. A world of liquid, a 
thalasso-planet, a 
liquid world with no continents nor islands. 
Liquid? 
"So that is it," he said, speaking with his mouth in his head in his body 
crouching on the shore of 
the Pond. "So that is where you came from. That is what you are." 
And he was back again, a puff of thistledown hung above a planet, watching, 
below him, a great 
upheaval in the ocean, with the liquid humping up and out, rounding and shaping 
itself into a 
sphere, perhaps many miles across, but, otherwise, quite like that other sphere 
that had come on a 
visit to the campfire. The sphere, he saw, was lifting, rising in the air, 
rising slowly at first, then 

62
gathering speed until it was coming at him like an outsize cannonball shot 
directly at him. It did not 
hit him, but it didn't miss him by too great a margin. His thistledown self was 
seized and buffeted 
by the turbulence of the air disrupted by the passage of the liquid sphere. Far 
behind it, he could 
hear the long rumbling of the thunder as the split atmosphere came crashing back 
into the vacuum 
that had been created by the passage of the sphere. 
Looking back, he saw that the planet was receding swiftly, plummeting backward 
into space. That 
was strange, he thought--that this should be happening to the planet. But, 
almost immediately, he 
realized it was not the planet to which it was happening, but to himself. He had 
been captured by 
the attraction of the massive liquid cannonball and, bouncing up and down, 
fluttered by its gravity, 
he was going along with it into the depths of space. 
Nothing seemed to make any sense. He seemed to have lost all orientation, Except 
for the liquid 
cannonball and the distant stars, there were no reference points and even these 
reference points 
seemed to have but little meaning. He had, it seemed, lost all measurement of 
time and space 
appeared to have no yardstick quality and while he retained something of his 
personal identity, it 
had dimmed to only a flicker of identity. That's what happens, he told himself, 
complacently, when 
you haven't any body. A million light-years could be no more than a step away, 
and a million years 
no more than the ticking of a second. The one thing of which he was aware was 
the sound of space, 
which was like an ocean plunging over a waterfall a thousand miles in 
height--and another sound, a 
high singsong, a cricket noise almost too high for his auditory sense to catch, 
and that, he told 
himself, was the sighing of the heat lightning which flared just this side of 
infinity and the flaring of 
the lightning, he knew-was the signature of time. 
Suddenly, while he looked away a moment, he became aware that the sphere he 
trailed through 
space had found a solar system and was streaking down through dense atmosphere 
to circle one of 
the planets. Even as he watched, the sphere bulged out on one side and humped up 
to form another 
smaller sphere, which fell away from it and began an orbit of the planet, while 
the larger parent 
sphere curved outward to plunge into space again. As it curved, it shook him 
loose and spun him 
out and he was free, tumbling toward the dark surface of the unknown planet. 
Fear dug deep claws 
into him and he opened his mouth to scream, astonished that he had a mouth to 
scream. 
But before he could get the scream out, there was no need to scream, for he was 
back inside his 
body crouched beside the Pond. 
His eyes were screwed tight shut and he opened them with the feeling that he had 
to pry them 
open rather than merely open them. He could see fairly well despite the darkness 
of the night. The 
Pond lay placid in its rocky bowl, an unrippling mirror glittering with the 
light of the stars that hung 
in the sky above. To the right, the mound reared up, a conelike shadow in the 
darkness of the land, 
and, to the left, the ridge upon which the ruined city stood was a black beast 
crouching. 
"So that is how it is," he said, speaking softly to the Pond, no more than a 
whisper, as if it were a 
secret they must keep between themselves. "A colony from that liquid planet. 
One, perhaps, of 
many colonies. But why colonies? What does the planet derive from colonies? A 
living ocean that 
sends out small segments of itself, small buckets of itself, to seed other solar 
systems. And seeding 
them, what does it gain? What does it hope to gain?" 
He quit his speaking and crouched in the midst of silence, a silence so profound 
that it was 
unnerving. A silence so deep and uncompromising that it seemed to him he could 
still hear the high 
singsong hiss of time. 
"Speak to me," he pleaded. "Why don't you speak to me? You can show-and-tell; 
why can't you 
speak?" 
For this was not enough, he told himself. Not enough to know what the Pond might 
be or how it 
had gotten there. This was a beginning only, a basic background fact, saying 
nothing of motive or 
hope or purpose and those three were important. 
"Look," he said, still pleading, "you're one life and I'm another life. By our 
very natures we 
cannot harm one another, have no reason to wish harm for one another. So there 
is nothing for 
either of us to fear. Look, I'll put it this way--is there something that I can 
do for you? Is there 
something you want to do for me? Or lacking that, which well might be the case 
since we operate 

63
on such different planes, why don't we try to tell each about the other, get to 
know one another 
better. You must have some intelligence. Surely this seeding of the planets is 
more than just instinc-
tive behavior, more than a plant broadcasting its seeds to take root in other 
soil, even as our coming 
here is more than a blind sowing of our cultural seed." 
He sat, waiting, and again there was a stirring in his mind, as if something had 
entered it and was 
striving to form a message there, to draw a picture there. Slowly, by painful 
degrees, the picture 
grew and built, at first a shifting, then a blur, and, finally, hardening into a 
cartoonlike representa-
tion that changed and changed again and yet again, becoming clearer and more 
definitive with each 
change until it seemed that there were two of him--two hims squatting there 
beside the Pond. 
Except that one of him was not simply squatting there, but held in its hand a 
bottle--the very bottle 
he'd brought back from the city--and was stooping to dip the bottle into the 
liquid of the Pond. 
Fascinated, he watched--the both of him watched--as the neck of the bottle 
gurgled, sending up a 
spray of breaking bubbles as the liquid of the Pond, filling the bottle, forced 
out the air within it. 
"All right," said the one of him. "All right and then what do I do?" 
The picture changed and the other of him, carrying the bottle carefully, was 
walking up the ramp 
into the Ship, although Ship came off rather badly, for it was lopsided and 
distorted, as bad a 
representation of the Ship as the etchings on the bottle must have been bad 
representations of the 
creatures they were intended to depict. 
The figure of his second self by now had entered the Ship and the ramp was 
rising and the Ship 
was lifting off the planet, heading into space. 
"So you want to go along," said Horton. "For the love of God, is there anything 
on this planet that 
doesn't want to go with us? But so little of you, just a jugful of you." 
This time the image in his mind formed swiftly--a diagram that showed that 
far-distant liquid 
planet and many other planets with globes of the liquid either heading for them 
or leaving them, 
with little drops shaken off the spheres falling on the planets the parent 
spheres were seeding. The 
diagram changed, and lines were drawn from all the seeded planets and the liquid 
planet itself into a 
point in space where all the lines came together with a circle drawn around that 
point where the 
lines converged. The lines disappeared but the circle stayed and again the lines 
were swiftly drawn 
to converge within the circle. 
"You mean--?" asked Horton and the same thing took place again. 
"Inseparable?" asked Horton. "Are you saying there is only one of you? That 
there are not many 
of you, but only the one of you? That there's just one I? No we, but a single I? 
That you here before 
me is only an extension of one single life?" 
The square of the diagram went white. 
"You mean that's right?" asked Horton. "That's what you did mean?" 
The diagram faded from his mind, and in its place came a feeling of strange 
happiness, of 
satisfaction, of a problem solved. No word, no sign. Just the sense of being 
right, of having caught 
the meaning. 
"But I talk with you," he said, "and you seem to understand. How come you 
understand?" 
There was the squirming in his mind again, but this time no picture formed. 
There were flutterings 
and vague shapes and then it all was gone. 
"So," he said, "there's no way you can tell me." But, perhaps, he thought, there 
was no need to 
tell him. He should know himself. He could talk with Ship, through the 
contraption, whatever it 
might be, that had been grafted on his brain, and perhaps here the same sort of 
principle was 
involved. He and Ship talked in words, but that was because they both knew the 
words. They had a 
common medium of communication, but with Pond that medium did not exist. So 
Pond, grasping 
some meaning from the thoughts he'd formed inside his mind when he spoke--the 
thoughts that 
were brother to his words--had fallen back upon the most basic of all forms of 
communications, 
pictures. Pictures painted on a cave wall, etched on pottery, drawn on 
paper--pictures in the mind. 
The acting-out of thought processes. 
I guess it doesn't matter, he told himself. Just so we can communicate. Just so 
ideas can cross the 
barrier between us. But it was so insane, he thought--a biologic construct of 
many different tissues 

64
talking to a mass of biologic liquid. 
And not only the few gallons of liquid lying in this rocky bowl, but the 
billions upon billions of 
gallons of liquid on that distant planet. 
He stirred, shifting his position, the muscles of his legs cramped with 
squatting. 
"But why?" he asked. "Why would you want to go with us? Surely not to plant 
another tiny 
colony--a bucket colony on some other planet that we may reach in time, perhaps 
centuries from 
now. Such a purpose makes no sense. You have far better ways to plant your 
colonies." 
Swiftly the picture formed inside his mind--the liquid planet shimmering in its 
devastating 
blueness against the jet backdrop of space, and spearing out from it thin, 
jagged lines, many thin, 
jagged lines aimed at other planets. And even as he saw the lines snake out 
across the diagram, 
Horton seemed to know that the other planets at which the lines were aimed were 
those planets 
upon which the liquid planet had established colonies. Strangely, he told 
himself, those jagged lines 
bore some resemblance to the human-conventional sign for thunderbolts, realizing 
that Pond had 
borrowed from him certain conventionalities to implement its communication with 
him. 
One of the many planets in the diagram zoomed toward him until it was larger 
than all the others 
and he saw that it was not a planet, but was Ship, still lopsided, but Ship 
undeniably, with one of the 
lightning bolts shattering against it. The lightning bolt bounced off Ship and 
came streaking straight 
toward him. He ducked instinctively, but was not quick enough and it struck him 
straight between 
the eyes. He seemed to shatter and was flung across the universe and was 
stripped naked and laid 
open. And as he spattered across the universe, a great peace came out of 
somewhere and settled 
softly on him. In that instant, for a flaring second, he saw and understood. 
Then it all was gone and 
he was back again, in his own body, on the rocky shelf beside the Pond. 
The god-hour, he thought--it's unbelievable. Yet, as he thought more upon it, it 
gained belief and 
logic. The human body--all sophisticated, biologic bodies--had a nervous system 
that was, in 
effect, a communication network. Why, knowing this, should he balk at the 
thought of another 
communication network, operating across the light-years, to tie together the 
many scattered 
segments of another intelligence? A signal to remind each scattered colony that 
it still was a part 
and would remain a part of the organism, that it was, in fact, the organism. 
A shotgun effect, he had earlier told himself--caught in the spray of pellets 
that had been aimed 
at something else. That something else, he now knew, was Pond. But if it had 
been only a shotgun 
effect, why should Pond now want to include him and Ship in that spray of 
god-hour pellets? Why 
did it want him to take on board a bucket of itself to provide a target that 
would include him and 
Ship in the god-hour? Or had he misunderstood? 
"Have I misunderstood?" he asked the Pond and in answer, he felt again the 
scattering, the 
opening-out and the peace that came with it. Funny, he thought, he had not known 
the peace before, 
but only fright and befuddlement. The peace and understanding, although this 
time there had only 
been the peace and none of the understanding, and that was just as well, he 
thought, for even as he'd 
sensed it, he had gained no idea of the understanding, of what kind of 
understanding it might be, but 
simply the knowledge, the impression, that there was an understanding and that, 
in time, it might be 
grasped. To him, he realized, the understanding had been as befuddling as all 
the rest of it. 
Although not to everyone, he told himself; Elayne, for an instant, had seemed to 
grasp the 
understanding--grasping it in one instinctive instant, then losing it again. 
Pond was offering him 
something--him and Ship--and it would be boorish and ungracious to see in what 
it offered 
anything but the wish of one intelligence to share with another something of its 
knowledge and its 
insight. As he had told Pond, there should be no conflict between two such 
dissimilar life-forms. By 
the very nature of their differences, there should be no competition nor 
antagonism between them. 
And yet, far in the back of his mind, he heard the tinny ringing of the alarm 
bells that were built into 
every human brain. That was wrong, he told himself, fiercely, that was unworthy; 
but the ringing of 
the bells went on and on. You do not make yourself vulnerable, chimed the bells, 
you do not expose 
your soul, you trust nothing until by proven tests-proven many times-you can be 
triply certain that 
no harm will come. 
Although, he told himself, the offering by Pond might not be totally selfless. 
There might be some 

65
part of humanity--some knowledge, some perspective or viewpoint, some ethical 
judgment, some 
historical evaluation-- that Pond could use. Thinking this, he felt a surge of 
pride that there might 
be something humankind could contribute to this unsuspected intelligence, giving 
some evidence 
that intelligent entities, no matter how dissimilar they might be, could find a 
common ground, or 
learn a common ground. 
Apparently Pond was offering, for whatever reason, a gift which had great value 
in its scale of 
values--no gaudy trinket such as a greater, arrogant civilization might offer a 
barbarian. 
Shakespeare had written that the god-hour might be a teaching mechanism and it 
could be that, of 
course. But it could be, as well, he thought, a religion. Or simply no more than 
a recognition signal, 
a clan call, a convention to remind Pond and all the other Ponds throughout the 
galaxy of the unity, 
the I-ness, of all of them with one another and their parent planet. A sign of 
brotherhood, perhaps--
and if this were the case, then he, and through him, the human race, was being 
offered at least a 
provisional position in the brotherhood. 
But it was more, he was certain, than a mere recognition signal. On the third 
time it had come to 
him, he had not been triggered to the symbolic experience he had lived through 
the times before, 
but to a scene out of his own childhood and to a quite human fantasy in which he 
had talked with 
Shakespeare's clacking skull. Was that mere triggering or had it happened 
because the mechanism 
(the mechanism?) responsible for the god-hour had wormed its way into his mind 
and soul, in fact 
examining and probing and analyzing him as it, those first two times, had 
appeared to do. 
Something of the sort, he remembered, apparently had been experienced by 
Shakespeare. 
"Is there something that you want?" he asked. "You do this for us--what can we 
do for you?" 
He waited for the answer, but there was no answer. Pond lay dark and placid, 
with the starlight 
freckling its surface. 
You do this for us, he'd said; what can we do for you? Making it sound as if 
what Pond had 
offered was something, of great value, something that was needed. Was it? he 
asked himself. Was it 
something that was needed, that was even wanted? Was it not, perhaps, something 
they could do 
without, most happily without? 
And was ashamed. First contact, he thought. Then knew he was wrong. First 
contact for him and 
Ship, but perhaps not first contact for Pond or the many other Ponds on many 
other planets. Nor 
first contact for many other humans. Since Ship had left the Earth, man had 
spread across the 
galaxy, and these splinters of humanity must have made many other first contacts 
with creatures 
strange and wonderful. 
"Pond," he said. "I spoke to you. Why don't you answer, Pond?" 
A tiny flutter stirred within his mind, a contented flutter, like the soft 
sighing of a puppy settling 
down to sleep. 
"Pond!" he said. 
There was no answer. The flutter was not repeated. And this was the end of it, 
the all of it? 
Perhaps Pond was tired. It struck him as ridiculous that such a thing as Pond 
was tired. 
He rose to his feet, and his cramped leg muscles cried relief. But rising to his 
feet, he did not 
move immediately, standing there and listening to the amazement that thundered 
through his brain. 
He had been disappointed, he remembered, at his first glimpse of the planet, 
disappointed at its 
lack of alienness, thinking of it as no more than just a dowdy Earth. It was, he 
said, defending his 
first impression, dowdy enough, if it came to that. 
Now that it was time to go, now that he'd been dismissed, he found a strange 
reluctance to leave. 
As if, having struck up a new friendship, he hated to say good-bye. The term was 
wrong, he knew; 
it was not a friendship. He sought for the right word for it. There was none 
that he could think of. 
Could there, he wondered, ever be an actual friendship, a bone and blood 
friendship, between two 
intelligences so totally different. Could they ever find that common ground, 
that area of agreement, 
where they could say to one another: I agree with you--you may have approached 
the concept of a 
common humanity and a common philosophy from a different standpoint, but your 
conclusions 
coincide with mine. 
It was unlikely, he told himself, in detail, but on the basis of broad 
principles, it might be possible. 

66
"Good night, Pond," he said. "I am glad I finally met you. I hope it will go 
well with the both of 
us." 
Slowly he climbed the rocky shore and set out down the path, using the 
flashlight to find his way. 
As he rounded a bend, the light picked up a blur of whiteness. He shifted the 
light. It was Elayne. 
"I came to meet you," she said. 
He walked up to her. "It was a foolish thing to do," he told her. "You could 
have lost your way." 
"I couldn't stay back there," she said. "I had to hunt you out. I'm frightened. 
There is something 
about to happen." 
"The sense of awareness once again?" he asked. "Like when we found the creature 
caught in 
time?" 
She nodded. "I would suppose that's it. Just feeling uncomfortable and on edge. 
As if I were 
teetering somewhere, waiting to jump, but not knowing where to jump." 
"After what happened before," he said, "I am inclined to believe you. Your 
hunch, that is. Or is it 
stronger than a hunch?" 
"I don't know," she said. "It's so strong that I am frightened--desperately 
frightened. I wonder--
would you spend the night with me? I have a togetherness blanket. Would you 
share it with me?" 
"I'd be pleased and honored." 
"Not just because we're a man and woman," she said. "Although I suppose that's a 
part of it. But 
because we're two human beings--the only human beings. We need one another." 
"Yes," he said, "we do." 
"You had a woman. You said the others died . . 
"Helen," he said. "She's been dead hundreds of years, but to me only yesterday." 

"Because you were in sleep?" 
"That's right. Time is canceled out by sleep." 
"If you wish, you can pretend I'm Helen. I will not mind at all." 
He looked at her. "I won't pretend," he said. 

25 
So there goes your theory, said the scientist to the monk, about the hand of God 
brushing across 
our brows. 
I don't care, said the grande dame. I don't like this planet. I still think it's 
ishy. You can get 
excited about another life-form, another intelligence very much unlike us, but I 
don't like it any 
better than I do the planet. 
I must confess, said the monk, that I do not care too greatly about the idea of 
bringing even a 
gallon or so of the Pond aboard. I don't understand why Carter agreed to do it. 
If you recall what passed between Carter and the Pond, said the scientist, 
you'll realize that 
Carter made no promise. Although I rather think we should. If we find a mistake 
has been made, 
there is a simple remedy. Anytime we wish, Nicodemus can jettison the Pond, 
heave it out of the 
ship. 
But why should we bother with it at all? asked the grande dame. This thing that 
Carter calls the 
god-hour--it is nothing to us. It brushed us, that is all. We sensed it, as 
Nicodemus did. We did not 
experience it, as did Carter and Shakespeare. Carnivore-- what happened to him 
we don't really 
know. He was mostly frightened. 
We have not experienced it, I am sure, said the scientist, because our minds, 
which are better 
trained and disciplined. 
Which is only so because we have nothing but our minds, said the monk. 
That is true, said the scientist. As I was saying, with minds better 
disciplined, we instinctively 
shunted off the god-hour. We did not let it get to us. But if we opened up our 
minds to it, we 
probably would derive much more from it than do any of the others. 
Even if that should not be the case, said the monk, we'll have Horton on board. 
He is quite good 
at it. 
And the girl, said the grande dame. Elayne--is that her name? It will be good to 
have two humans 

67
back on board again. 
That wouldn't work for long, said the scientist. Horton or the two of them, 
whichever it may be, 
must go into cold-sleep very shortly. We can't allow our human passengers to 
age. They represent a 
vital resource we must make the most of. 
But for only a few months? asked the grande dame. In a few months, they'd be 
able to pick up a 
good deal from the god-hour. 
We can't afford a few months, said the scientist. A human life is short, at 
best. 
Except for us, said the monk. 
We can't be entirely sure how long our lives may be, said the scientist. At 
least not yet, we can't. 
Although I would suggest that, in the full meaning of the term, we may be no 
longer human. 
Of course we are, said the grande dame. We are far too human. We cling to our 
identities and 
individualities. We quarrel among ourselves. We let our prejudice show through. 
We still are petty 
and objectionable. And we were not meant to be that way. The three minds were 
supposed to flow 
together, to become one mind much greater and more efficient than three minds. 
And I'm talking 
not only about myself, with my pettiness, which I am quite willing to confess, 
but you, Sir Scientist, 
with your exaggerated scientific viewpoint that you tend to flaunt to prove your 
superiority over a 
simpleminded, flighty woman and a dumb bunny of a monk... 
I will not deign to debate with you, said the scientist, but I must remind you 
that there have been 
times... 
Yes, times, said the monk. When deep in interstellar space, there were no 
distractions, when we 
had worn ourselves out with our pettiness, when we were bored to death. Then we 
came together 
out of sheer weariness and those were the only times when we came close to the 
fine-honed 
communal mind that it was expected by those back on Earth we finally would 
achieve. I'd like to see 
the look on the faces of all those weighty neurologists and those bird-brained 
psychologists who 
worked out the scenario for us if they could only know how all their 
calculations worked out in 
actuality. Of course, all of them are dead by now... 
It was the emptiness, said the grande dame, that drove us together. The 
emptiness and the 
nothingness. Like three frightened children huddling together against the 
emptiness. Three minds 
huddling together for mutual protection and that was all it was. 
Perhaps, said the scientist, you have come close to the truth of the situation. 
In your bitterness, 
close to the truth. 
I am not bitter, said the grande dame, If I'm remembered at all, I am remembered 
as a selfless 
person who gave of herself all her life and who gave more than any human should 
be ever expected 
to give. They will think of me as one who gave up her body and the solace of 
death to advance the 
cause... 
So, said the monk, once again it comes down to human vanity and to misguided 
human hopes, 
although I do not agree with you on that business about the solace of death. But 
you're right about 
the emptiness. 
The emptiness, the scientist thought to himself. Yes, the emptiness. And it was 
strange that, as a 
man who should have understood the emptiness, who should have expected it, he 
had failed to 
understand, failed to come to terms with it, but had been seized with the same 
illogical reaction to it 
as the other two, in the end developing a shameful fear of it. Emptiness, he had 
known, was only 
relative. Space was not empty and he had known it wasn't. Although thinly 
scattered, there was 
matter there, much of it made up of fairly complex molecules. He had told this 
to himself time and 
time again, saying to himself--it is not empty, it is not empty, there is matter 
there. Yet, he had not 
been able to convince himself. For there was in the seeming emptiness of space 
an uncaring and a 
coldness that drove one in upon one's self, shrinking from the coldness and 
uncaring. The worst of 
the emptiness, he thought, was that it made one seem so small and insignificant 
and that, he told 
himself, was the thought to fight against for life, no matter what its 
smallness, could not be 
insignificant. Life, on the face of it, was the one thing, the only thing, that 
had any meaning in the 
entire universe. 
And yet, said the monk, there were times, I recoil, when we overcame the fright 
and no longer 

68
huddled, when we forgot the ship, when, as a newborn entity, we strode across 
the emptiness as lf it 
were quite natural, as if we walked a pasture or the garden. It always seemed to 
me that this time 
came, that this condition came about only when we reached a point where it 
seemed we could bear 
no more, when we had reached and exceeded the feeble capabilities of 
humanity--when this time 
came there was an escape valve of some sort, a compensating situation in which 
we entered upon a 
new plane of existence. 
I remember, too, said the scientist, and from the memory can snatch some hope. 
How confused we 
seem to be, able to convince ourselves of our hopelessness and then recoiling 
some small fact that 
can give us hope. It's all so new to us--that's our trouble. Despite the 
millennia, it's still too new to 
us. A situation so unique, so alien to our human concepts, that it's a wonder 
we're not more 
confused. 
The grande dame said, You recall that from time to time, on this planet, we have 
detected another 
intelligence, a sort of whiff of another intelligence, as if we were hounds 
sniffing out an ancient 
trail. And now that we have felt the full force of the Pond 
intelligence--reluctant as I am to say it, 
for I want no more intelligence-the Pond-intelligence does not seem to be the 
one that we earlier 
had detected. Is it possible there is yet another great intelligence upon this 
silly planet? 
The creature-in-time, perhaps, suggested the monk. The intelligence we detected 
was very faint, 
extremely subtle. As if it were trying to hide against detection. 
I doubt that would be it, said the scientist. A thing encased in time, I should 
judge, would be 
undetectable. I can think of no more effective insulation than a shield of 
arrested time. The terrible 
thing about time is that we know it not at all. Space, matter and energy--these 
are factors that we 
can pretend to recognize, or at least theoretically accept their theoretical 
values. Time is the com-
plete mystery. We cannot be certain of its actuality. It has no handle we can 
grasp to examine it. 
So there may yet be another intelligence--an unknown intelligence? 
I do not care, said the grande dame. I have no wish to know it. I hope that this 
pretty puzzle in 
which we've become involved comes to an early end so we can get out of here. 
It won't be long, said the monk. A few more hours, perhaps. The planet's closed, 
and there is 
nothing further to be done. In the morning, they'll go down and look at the 
tunnel and then will 
know there's nothing to be done. But before that happens, there is a decision 
that must be made. 
Carter has not asked us because he is afraid to ask us. He fears the answer we 
will give. 
The answer is no, said the scientist. Much as we may regret it, the answer must 
be no. Carter may 
think harshly of us. He may say we've lost our humanity with our bodies, that we 
retain only the 
coldness of our intellect. But that will be his softness speaking, forgetting 
that we must be hard, that 
softness has but little part to play out here, away from our own conditioned 
planet. And, fur-
thermore, it would be no kindness to the Carnivore. He'd drag out his weary life 
within this metal 
cage, with Nicodemus hating him and him hating Nicodemus--perhaps afraid of 
Nicodemus--and 
that would be heaping coals upon his shame, that he, a warrior of repute who has 
killed many evil 
monsters, should be reduced to fearing a spindly mechanism such as Nicodemus. 
With reason, said the monk, for Nicodemus undoubtedly, in time, would kill 
him... 
He is so uncouth, said the grande dame, a shudder in her thought. So lacking in 
sensibilities, with 
none of the niceties nor considerations. . 
Which do you mean? asked the monk. Carnivore or Nicodemus? 
Oh, not Nicodemus. I think he is cute. 

26 
POND cried out in terror. 
Hearing it with the far edges of his mind, Horton stirred in the warmth and 
nearness, the intimacy 
and the nakedness, clinging to the closeness of another human--a woman, but with 
the humanity as 
important as the woman, for in this place, they were the only humans. 
Pond cried out again, a shrill ripple of alarm, slicing through Horton's brain. 
He sat up in the 
blanket. 
"What is it, Carter Horton?" Elayne asked sleepily. 

69
"It's Pond," he said. "There is something wrong." 
The first flush of dawn ran up the eastern sky, shedding a ghostly half-light in 
which the trees and 
the Shakespeare house stood out hazily. The fire had burned low, into a bed of 
coals that winked 
with blood-red eyes. Beyond the fire Nicodemus stood, facing in the direction of 
the Pond. He stood 
stiff and straight, alert. 
"Here are your pants," said Elayne. Horton reached out a hand and took them. 
"What is it, Nicodemus?" he asked. 
"Something screamed," said the robot. "Not so you could hear it. But I could 
sense the 
screaming." 
Struggling into his trousers, Horton shivered in the dawn chill. 
The cry came again, more urgent than it had been before. 
"Look what's coming up the path," said Elayne, her voice tight. 
Horton turned to see and gulped. There were three of them. They were white and 
smooth and 
looked like upended slugs, greasy and repulsive things such as might be found 
beneath a rock that 
had been overturned. They came rapidly, hopping on the lower, tapered end of 
their bodies. They 
had no feet but that didn't seem to bother them. They had no arms nor 
faces--they were just fat, 
happy slugs, skipping rapidly up the path that led down to the tunnel. 
"Three more who are marooned," said Nicodemus. "We're getting to be quite a 
colony. How do 
you think it happens that so many are coming through that tunnel?" 
Carnivore came stumbling through the door of Shakespeare House. He stretched and 
scratched 
himself. 
"Who the hell are them?" he asked. 
"They haven't introduced themselves," said Nicodemus. "They just now showed up." 

"Funny-looking, are they not?" said Carnivore. "They haven't got no feet, they 
just hippety 
along." 
"There is something happening," said Elayne. "Something dreadful. I felt it last 
night, remember, 
that something was about to happen and now it's happening." 
The three slugs came up the path, paying no attention to those who stood about 
the fire, brushing 
past them to take the path that led to the Pond. 
The light in the east had brightened, and from far off in the forest something 
made a sound that 
sounded like someone dragging a stick along a picket fence. 
Another cry from Pond slashed through Horton's mind. He started running down the 
path that led 
to the Pond and Carnivore swung in beside him, running with a loping stride. 
"Would you disclose to me," he asked, "what has transpired to bring about 
excitement and so 
much running?" 
"Pond's in some kind of trouble." 
"How could Pond be in trouble? Someone throwing rocks at him?" 
"I don't know," said Horton, "but he's screaming plenty loud." 
The path curved as it crossed the ridge. Below them lay the Pond and beyond the 
Pond, the 
conical hill. Something was happening to the hill. It was thrusting up and 
breaking apart, and out of 
it was rising something dark and horrible. The three slugs were huddled 
together, crouching, on the 
shore. 
Carnivore sped up, loping swiftly down the path. Horton yelled at him. "Come 
back, you fool! 
Come back, you crazy fool!" 
"Horton, look," cried Elayne. "Not at the hill. Up on the city ridge." 
One of the buildings, Horton saw, had shattered, its masonry wrenched apart, and 
out of it was 
emerging a creature that glittered in the morning sun. 
"It's our time creature," said Elayne. "The one we found." 
Looking at it in the block of frozen time, Horton had been unable to discern its 
shape, but now, 
unfolded from its prison, it seemed a thing of glory. 
Great wings were stretching out, and the light flared off them in a rainbow of 
many colors, as if 
they were constructed of many tiny prisms. A savage beaked head was poised on a 
longish neck and 

70
the head, Horton thought, looked as if it might wear a helmet set with precious 
stones. Curved, 
gleaming talons extended from the heavy claws and the long tail was barbed with 
sharp and 
glistening spines. 
"A dragon," Elayne said, softly. "Like the dragons out of the old legends of the 
Earth." 
"Perhaps," said Horton. "No one knows what a dragon was, if there was a dragon." 

But the dragon, if it was a dragon, was in trouble. Free of the stout stone 
house in which it had 
been imprisoned, it beat its way into the air, its huge wings flapping awkwardly 
to drive it upward. 
Flapping awkwardly, Horton thought, when it should be skimming into the sky with 
wings that 
were strong and sure, climbing the staircase of the air as a fleet-footed being 
would run joyously up 
a hill, exulting in the strength of legs, the capacity of lungs. 
Remembering Carnivore running down the path, he turned his head to see where he 
might be. 
While he did not immediately catch sight of Carnivore, he saw that the hill just 
beyond the Pond 
had rapidly broken up, shattered and fragmented by the creature that was clawing 
its way from it. 
Great slabs and broken chunks of the hill were rolling down the steepness of its 
sides and a large 
amount of debris--stone and soil--had accumulated about its foot. The lower 
reaches of the hill, 
still intact, bore cracks that ran in jagged lines, the kind of cracks that an 
earthquake might open up. 
But while he saw all this, it was the emerging creature that claimed his 
attention. 
It dripped with filthiness, great patches of foulness scaling off it. Its head 
was a blob and the rest 
of it as well--a great blob that had a semblance of being humanoid, but was not. 
The kind of 
horrible travesty of humanity that some barbaric witch doctor, drooling venom, 
would fashion out 
of clay and straw and dung to represent an enemy that he sought to torture and 
destroy--lumpy, 
misshapen, lopsided, but with an evil in it, a vicious, drooling evil borrowed 
from the one who 
made it and magnified by the ineptness of itself. The evil rose from it as a 
poisonous vapor might 
rise from a murky swamp. 
The hill was almost leveled now, and as Horton watched in fascination, the 
monster tore itself free 
and took a stride forward, covering a good twelve feet in that single stride. 
Horton's hand drove down, clawing for his gun, realizing even as he did that he 
did not have the 
gun--that it was back at camp, that he had forgotten to fasten on his gun-belt, 
cursing himself for 
his forgetfulness, for there could be no question, not a shred of doubt, that an 
evil thing such as the 
creature that had hatched from out the hill could not be allowed to live. 
It was not until this moment that he sighted Carnivore. 
"Carnivore!" he shouted. 
For the demented fool was running straight toward the creature, running on all 
fours for better 
speed. He was charging with his head held low, and even from where he stood, 
Horton could see 
the smooth flow of his mighty muscles as he drove himself along. 
Then he leaped for the monster and was swarming up its massive body, the 
momentum of his 
charge carrying him up the body toward the short length of neck that tied the 
blob of the head to the 
lump that was the body. 
"NO! NO!" Nicodemus was crying back of him. "Leave it to Carnivore." 
Horton swung his head about and saw that Nicodemus had one metal claw wrapped 
about the 
wrist of the hand in which Elayne held her gun. 
Then he turned his head back swiftly to see Carnivore swing his tiger-head in a 
slashing, chopping 
blow. The gleaming tusks sliced into the monster's throat and tore through it. A 
gush of blackness 
came out of the throat, spouting, covering Carnivore's body with a dark 
substance that, for an 
instant, seemed to blend him with the dark body of the monster. One of the 
monster's club-like 
hands reached up, as if in reflex action, and closed on Carnivore, plucking him 
from its body, lifting 
him and hurling him away. The monster took another step and began to fall, 
crashing forward 
slowly, as a tree might fall to the final ax-stroke, reluctant to fall, striving 
to stay erect. 
Carnivore had fallen on the rocky shore of the Pond and was not rising. Charging 
down the path, 
Horton ran to him, brushing past the three slugs still crouched upon the shore. 
Carnivore was lying face down and, kneeling beside him, Horton slowly turned him 
on his back. 
He was limp and sack-like. His eyes were closed and blood was running from his 
nostrils and the 

71
corner of his mouth. His body was befouled by the sticky black substance that 
had gushed from the 
monster's severed throat. Splintered, jagged bone thrust out of his chest. 
Nicodemus trotted up and knelt beside Horton. "How is he?" he asked. 
"He's alive," said Horton, "but maybe not for long. You don't happen to have a 
surgeon's 
transmog in that kit of yours?" 
"A simple one," said the robot. "Knowledge of simple illnesses, how to deal with 
them. Some of 
the principles of medicine. Nothing that could take care of that rib cage." 
"You shouldn't have stopped me," Elayne said to Nicodemus, speaking bitterly. "I 
could have 
killed that monster before it laid a hand on Carnivore." 
"You don't understand," said Nicodemus. "Carnivore needed it." 
"You don't make sense," she said. 
"What he means," said Horton, "is that Carnivore's a warrior. He specialized in 
killing monsters. 
He went from world to world, seeking out the most deadly species. It was a 
cultural thing. He got 
high points for doing it. He was very near the top killer of his people. This 
one, more than likely, 
will make him the greatest killer ever. It will give him a sort of cultural 
immortality." 
"But what's the use of it?" she asked. "His people will never know." 
"Shakespeare wrote about that very thing," said Nicodemus. "He gained the 
impression that 
somehow they would." 
One of the slugs, hopping gently, came up and crouched opposite Horton, 
Carnivore between 
them. A tentacle extruded from its soft, pulpy body and the tip of it felt 
carefully over Carnivore's 
body. Horton looked up, expecting to look into the face of the slug, not 
remembering that there was 
no face. The blunt upper end of the body looked back at him--looked back as if 
there had been 
eyes. No eyes, and yet the sense of looking. He felt a tingling in his brain, a 
faint, eerie tingling as if 
a weak electrical current might be running through it, a sensation that was 
queasily unpleasant. 
"It's trying to talk with us," said Nicodemus. "Do you feel it, too?" 
"What is it that you want?" asked Horton of the slug. When he spoke, the 
electric tingling in his 
brain made a little jump--a jump of recognition?--then went on tingling. Nothing 
further 
happened. 
"I don't think there's any use," said Nicodemus. "It's trying to tell us 
something, but there is no 
way it can. It can't reach us." 
"Pond could talk to us," said Horton. "Pond talked with me." 
Nicodemus made a shrug of resignation. "These things are different A different 
kind of mind, a 
different kind of signal." 
Carnivore's eyes fluttered open. 
"He's coming to," said Nicodemus. "He's going to be hurting. I'll go back to 
camp. I think I have 
a hypodermic." 
"No," said Carnivore, speaking feebly. "No needle in the butt. I hurt. It not 
for long. The monster, 
it is dead?" 
"Very dead," said Horton. 
"Is good," said Carnivore. "I cut its goddamn throat. I be very good at that. I 
am good at 
monsters." 
"You'll have to take it easy," said Horton. "In a little while, we'll try to 
move you. Get you back 
to camp." 
Carnivore closed his eyes wearily. "No camp," he said. "Here as good as 
anywhere." 
He coughed, choking on the new blood that splashed out of his mouth and ran 
across his chest. 
"What happened to the dragon?" asked Horton. "Is it anywhere about?" 
"It crashed across the Pond," said Elayne. "There was something wrong with it. 
It couldn't fly. It 
tried to fly and fell." 
"Too long in time," said Nicodemus. 
The slug lifted its tentacle and touched Horton's shoulder to gain his 
attention. It gestured up the 
shore where the monster lay, a black lump on the land. Then it tapped Carnivore 
three times and 
tapped itself three times. It grew another tentacle, and with the two of them 
made a motion as if to 

72
pick up Carnivore and hold him tight against itself, cradling him, holding him 
with tenderness. 
"It's trying to say thank you," Nicodemus said. "Trying to thank Carnivore." 
"Maybe trying to tell us it can help him," said Elayne. 
His eyes still closed, Carnivore said, "There's nothing that can help me. Just 
leave me here. Don't 
move me till I'm dead." 
He coughed again. 
"And don't, in kindness, tell me I'm not dying. You'll stay with me until it's 
done?" 
"We'll stay with you," said Elayne. 
"Horton?" 
"Yes, my friend." 
"If this hadn't happened, you would have taken me? You'd not have left me here. 
You would 
have taken me when you left the planet?" 
"We'd have taken you," said Horton. 
Carnivore closed his eyes. "I knew you would," he said. "I always knew you 
would." 
By now it was full day, the sun a hand's-breadth above the horizon. The slanting 
sunlight glittered 
off the Pond. 
And now, thought Horton, it didn't really matter about the tunnel's being 
closed. Carnivore no 
longer would be marooned in this place he hated. Elayne would leave in the Ship, 
and there would 
be no need of staying longer. Whatever had been meant to transpire upon this 
planet was done and 
ended now. And, he thought, I wish that I could know, perhaps not now, but some 
day, what it was 
all about. 
"Carter, look!" said Nicodemus in a quiet, tense tone. "The monster. . ." 
Horton jerked up his head and looked, gagging at the sight. The monster, lying 
just a few hundred 
feet away, was melting. It was falling in upon itself, a putrescent mess. It 
writhed in seeming life as 
it sank into a stinking, obscene puddle, with little streams of steaming 
nastiness flowing from the 
puddle. 
He watched in horrified, offended fascination as it went down to an oily, 
nauseous scum and the 
unbidden thought came across his mind that now he could never fix quite straight 
in mind the shape 
that it had held. The only impression that he had gained in that moment before 
Carnivore had 
slashed the life from it was a lumpiness, a distorted lumpiness that really was 
no shape at all. That 
might be the way with evil, he thought--it had no shape at all. It was a 
lumpiness and a puddled 
pool of filth and you never knew quite what it was, so that you were left quite 
free to imagine what 
it was, driven by the fear of the unknown to clothe it in whatever fashion 
seemed most horrible to 
you. So that evil might take on as many guises as there were men to clothe 
it--each man's evil 
would be a little different from every other man's. 
"Horton." 
"Yes, Carnivore, what is it?" 
The voice was low and raspy and Horton went on his knees beside him, bending 
close so that he 
could hear. 
"When it's done," said Carnivore, "you'll leave me here. Leave me in the open 
where I can be 
found." 
"I don't understand," said Horton. "Found by what?" 
"The scavengers. The cleaners-up. The morticians. Little hungry skitterers that 
will ingest 
anything at all. Insects, birds, small animals, worms, bacteria. You will do it, 
Horton?" 
"Of course I'll do it if you wish. If that's what you really want." 
"A giving back," said Carnivore. "A final giving back. Not begrudging the little 
hungry things my 
flesh. Making myself an offering to many other lives. One great final sharing." 
"I understand," said Horton. 
"A sharing, a giving back," said Carnivore. "Those are important things." 

27 
As they made their way around the Pond, Elayne said, "The robot is not with us." 


73
"He's back there with Carnivore," said Horton. "He's keeping one last vigil. 
It's his way of doing 
things. A sort of Irish wake. But you'd not know of Irish wakes." 
"No, I wouldn't. What's an Irish wake?" 
"Sitting with the dead. Posting vigil over them. Nicodemus did it with the other 
humans who were 
on the ship with me. On a lonely planet of an unknown sun. He wanted to pray for 
them; he tried to 
pray and couldn't. He thought it was not proper for a robot to try to say a 
prayer. So he did 
something else for them. He stayed awhile with them. He did not hurry off." 
"How beautiful of him. It was better than a prayer." 
"I think so, too," said Horton. "You're sure you know where the dragon fell? 
There's still no sign 
of it." 
"I watched it fall," she said. "I think I know the place. It's just over there." 

"Remember how we wondered why the dragon was encased in time," said Horton, "if 
it were 
encased in time. Writing our own scenario to push back the fact that we knew 
exactly nothing. 
Creating our own little human fable to give some meaning and some explanation to 
an event that 
was beyond our understanding." 
"To me," she said, "it seems quite apparent now why it was left here. It was 
left here to wait until 
the monster hatched, to kill the monster when it hatched. By some means, the 
hatching of the 
monster would trigger the time trap to turn the dragon loose, and it did turn 
the dragon loose, for all 
the good it did." 
Horton said, "They--whoever they might be--chained the dragon in time against 
the day when 
the monster hatched. They must have known the egg had been laid and if they knew 
that, why 
didn't they seek and destroy the egg--if it was an egg--or whatever it might be? 
Why all the 
dramatic mumbo-jumbo?" 
"Maybe they knew only that the egg had been laid, but had no idea where." 
"But the dragon was located less than a mile. . ." 
"Maybe they knew the general area. Even so, finding the egg would be like 
sifting through acres 
of sandy beach, looking for an object that might have been hard to distinguish 
even should it be 
uncovered--so camouflaged that even if you looked directly at it, you might not 
recognize it. And 
they might not have had the time to look. They had to leave here for some 
reason, perhaps rather 
quickly, so they installed the dragon in the vault and when they left the 
planet, closed down the 
tunnel so that if something happened and the dragon failed to kill the monster, 
the monster couldn't 
leave the planet. 
"And the hatching. We talk about the monster hatching, but I don't think the 
term is quite correct. 
Whatever brought the monster into being must have taken a long time. The monster 
must have 
undergone a long period of development before it broke from the hill. Like the 
old seventeen-year 
locust out of Earth, or at least the old story about the seventeen-year locust. 
Except that the monster 
took much longer than seventeen years." 
"What puzzles me," said Horton, "is why whoever laid the trap for the monster by 
putting the 
dragon into time should have feared the monster so greatly to go to such great 
pains. The monster 
was big, sure, and an unlovely thing, but Carnivore ripped his throat out with 
one stroke, and that 
was the end of him." 
Elayne shuddered. "He was evil. You could feel the evil pouring out of him. You 
felt it, didn't 
you?" 
"I felt it," Horton said. 
"Not just a little evil, as so much of life displays a little evil, or is 
capable of a little evil. Rather, 
there was a depth of evil in him that could not be measured. It was an absolute 
negation of 
everything that is good and decent. Carnivore caught it by surprise, before it 
had a chance to bring 
all its evil into focus. It was new-hatched, barely aware, when he came upon it. 
That is the only 
reason, I am sure, that he was able to do what he did." 
By now they had rounded the curve of the Pond below the height of land on which 
the ruined 
houses stood. 
"I think- it's up there," said Elayne. "Just up the hill." 

74
Leading the way, she began to climb. Looking back, Horton saw Nicodemus, reduced 
to toy 
proportion by distance, standing on the opposite shore. It was only with some 
difficulty that he 
could make out Carnivore's body, which tended to blend in with the barren shelf 
of rock on which it 
lay. 
Elayne had reached the crest of the hill and halted. When he climbed up beside 
her, she pointed. 
"There," she said. "There it is." 
A million jewels were sparkling in the underbrush. The dragon could not be seen 
because of the 
intervening vegetation, but the rainbowed reflection off its body showed where 
it had fallen. 
"It's dead," said Elayne. "It's not moving." 
"Not necessarily dead," said Horton. "It could be injured, but alive." 
Together they went plunging through the brush and when they were past a massive 
tree with low-
hanging branches, they could see the dragon. 
It was a thing of breath-catching beauty. Each of the tiny scales that covered 
the body was a point 
of gemlike light, little exquisitely colored jewels glinting in the sunlight. 
When Horton moved 
forward a step the entire body seemed to flare, the angle of the scales acting 
as a reflector that threw 
back the brightness of the day full into his face. But as he made another step, 
changing the angle of 
the scales in relation to himself, the flare came to an end and the sparkling 
came back, as if it were a 
tinseled Christmas tree entirely covered and obscured by little flashing lights, 
but lights far more 
colorful than a Christmas tree could ever wear. Deep blues and ruby reds, greens 
shading from the 
paleness of an evening springtime sky to the deep green of an angry sea, living 
yellow, the sunlit 
shine of topaz, the pink of apple blossoms, the autumn gleam of pumpkins-- and 
all the colors 
frosted over with the kind of scintillation that one might see on a frosty 
winter morning when every-
thing was diamonds. 
Elayne drew in her breath. "How beautiful!" she gasped. "More beautiful than we 
guessed when 
we saw it in the time vault." 
It was smaller than it had seemed when glimpsed flying in the air and it was 
lying very quietly. 
One gossamer wing thrust out from the slender body and sagged to lie upon the 
ground. The other 
was crumpled underneath it. The long neck was twisted so that the head rested 
with one cheek upon 
the ground. Seen close, the head still bore the look of a helmet. On the head 
the scales that covered 
the rest of the body were lacking. The helmet was shaped of hard structures that 
resembled 
polished' metal plates. The massive beak, thrust out from the helmet mask, also 
had the look of 
metal. 
Still lying quietly, unstirring, the eye in that part of the head that lay 
uppermost came open--a 
blue eye, a gentle eye, clear and limpid and unfrightened. 
"It's alive!" cried Elayne and started toward it. With a cry of warning, Horton 
put out a hand to 
stop her, but ducking past him, she dropped to her knees beside the cruel head, 
reached out and took 
it in her arms and lifting it, held it close against her breast. 
Horton stood petrified, afraid to move, afraid to make a single sound. A 
wounded, hurting 
creature - one thrust, one chop of that wicked beak... 
But nothing happened. The dragon did not move. Tenderly, Elayne let the head 
back to the 
ground, reached out a hand to stroke the jeweled neck. The dragon blinked a 
long, slow blink, its 
one eye fastened on her. 
"It knows that we are friends," she said. "It knows that we won't hurt it." 
The dragon blinked again and this time the eye stayed shut. Elayne went on 
stroking the creature's 
neck, crooning quietly to it. Horton stood where he was, listening to the soft 
crooning, the only 
sound (scarcely a sound) in a terrible quietness that had settled on the 
hilltop. Below him and across 
the Pond the toy that was Nicodemus still stood upon the shore beside the blotch 
that was 
Carnivore. Farther up the shore he could make out the larger blotch that was the 
shattered hill from 
which the monster had emerged. Of the monster there was no sign at all. 
He had known, he thought, about the monster--or he should have known. Only 
yesterday he had 
climbed the hill, going on hands and knees because that was the only way one 
could climb its 
steepness. Short of the top he had stopped and rested, lying flat upon his 
belly, and had sensed a 

75
vibration in the hill, like the beating of a heart. But he'd told himself, he 
recalled, that it was no 
more than his own heart beating, thumping with the exhaustion of the climb, and 
had thought no 
more of it. 
He looked back at the dragon and sensed the wrongness in it, but it took some 
time, even so, to 
know what the wrongness was. 
"Elayne," he said, softly. "Elayne." 
She looked up at him. 
"The dragon's dead," he said. "The color is fading." 
As they watched, the fading continued. The tiny scales lost their sparkle and 
the beauty went 
away. No longer a thing of wonder, it became a great gray beast and to one 
watching there could be 
no doubt that it had died. 
Slowly Elayne got to her feet, wiped her tear-wet face with balled fists. 
"But why?" she asked, wildly. "Why? If it were encased in time--if time had been 
stopped for 
it--it should have been as fresh and strong as the moment that it was placed in 
time. Time simply 
would not have existed for it. There would have been no change." 
"We don't know about time," said Horton. "Maybe those who put it into time 
didn't know as 
much about it as they thought they did. Perhaps time can't be controlled as 
easily and as reliably as 
they thought it could. There still could have been bugs in what they might have 
considered a perfect 
technique." 
"You're saying that something went wrong with the time vault. That there could 
have been a 
leakage." 
"There is no way that we can know," said Horton. "Time is still the great 
mystery to us. It is no 
more than a concept; we don't know if it even exists. The vault could have had 
unsuspected effects 
on living tissue or on mental processes. Life energy could have been drained 
away, metabolic 
poisons could have built up. Perhaps the length of duration was longer than the 
people who put the 
dragon into time had calculated. Some factor may have held up the hatching of 
the monster far 
beyond the usual length of time such a hatching should have taken." 
"It is strange," she said, "how events work out. If Carnivore had not been 
trapped upon this 
planet, the monster might be loose." 
"And Pond," said Horton. "If Pond had not alerted us, had not let out its shriek 
of warning. . ." 
"So that is what it was. That is how you knew. Why should Pond have been 
afraid?" 
"It probably sensed. the evil of the monster. Pond, perhaps, is not immune from 
evil." 
She came up the little slope and stood close beside Horton. "The beauty of it 
gone," she said. 
"That's a terrible thing. There is so little beauty in the universe; we can 
spare none of it. Maybe 
that's why death is so horrible; it takes away the beauty." 
"The twilight of the gods," said Horton. 
"The twilight. . ." 
"Another old Earth story," he said. "The monster, the dragon and Carnivore. All 
of them dead. A 
great final reckoning." 
She shivered in the warmth of the blazing sun. 
"Let's go back," she said. 

28 
THEY sat about the dying campfire. 
"Is there anyone," asked Nicodemus, "who feels like having breakfast?" 
Elayne shook her head. 
Horton rose slowly to his feet. "It's time to go," he said. 
"There's nothing more to keep us here. I know that and yet I seem to feel a 
strange reluctance to 
leave. We've been here only three days, but it seems much longer. Elayne, you 
are going with us?" 
"Of course," she said. "I thought you knew." "I suppose I did. Just asking to 
make sure." "If you 
want me and there's room." 
"We want you and there's room. There is a lot of room." 

76
"We'll want to take along Shakespeare's book," said Nicodemus. "I guess that's 
all. On the way 
back we could stop and pick up a pocket full of emeralds. I know that to us they 
may be worthless, 
but I can't get out of the habit of regarding them as valuable." 
"There's one other thing," said Horton. "I promised Pond I'd take some of him 
along. I'll get one 
of the bigger jugs Shakespeare collected from the city." 
Elayne spoke quietly. "Here come the slugs. We'd forgotten all about them." 
"They're easy things to forget," said Horton. "They slither in and out. They're 
unreal somehow. 
They're hard to keep in mind, almost as if they intend not to be kept in mind." 
"I wish we had the time," said Elayne, "to find out what they are. It couldn't 
have been just 
coincidence that they turned up exactly when they did. And they did thank 
Carnivore, or it looked 
as if they were thanking him. I have a feeling they played a greater part in all 
of this than we can 
ever guess." 
The foremost slug had grown a tentacle and was waving it at them. 
"Maybe," said Elayne, "they've just found out that the tunnel's closed." 
"They want us to go with them," said Nicodemus. 
"They probably want to show us that the tunnel's closed," said Horton. "As if we 
didn't know." 
"Even so," said Elayne, "we probably should go with them and find out what they 
want." 
"If we can," said Nicodemus. "The communication is not too good." 
- 
Horton led the way, with Elayne and Nicodemus following close behind. The slugs 
disappeared 
around the bend that hid the tunnel from view and Horton hurried after them. He 
rounded the bend 
and came to a sudden halt. 
The tunnel mouth was no longer dark; it gleamed with milky whiteness. 
Behind Horton, Nicodemus said, "Poor Carnivore. If he could only be here." 
"The slugs," said Elayne. "The slugs. . ." 
"The people of the tunnel, could that be it?" asked Horton. 
"Not necessarily," said Nicodemus. "The keepers of the tunnels, maybe. The 
guardians of the 
tunnels. Not the builders, necessarily." 
The three slugs were hopping down the path. They did not stop. They reached the 
tunnel mouth 
and hopped into it, disappearing. 
"The control panel has been replaced," said Nicodemus. "The slugs must have been 
the ones who 
did it. But how could they have known that something was about to happen that 
would enable them 
to open the tunnel? Somehow, someone must have known that the hatching was about 
to occur and 
that the planet could be opened." 
"It was Carnivore who made it possible," said Horton. "He pestered us, he 
breathed on us, he kept 
prodding us to get the tunnel open. But, in the end, he was the one who finally 
got it open, who 
made it possible. And too late to do him any good. Although we can't feel sorry 
for him. He got 
what he wanted. He carried out his purpose and there are few who do. His 
glory-search is over, and 
he's a great folk hero." 
"But he's dead," said Nicodemus. 
"Tell me," said Horton, remembering his talk with Shakespeare. "First tell me 
what is death." 
"It's an end," said Nicodemus. "It's like turning out a light." 
"I'm not so sure," said Horton. "Once I would have agreed with you, but now I'm 
not quite sure." 
Elayne spoke in a small-girl voice. "Carter," she said. "Carter listen to me, 
please." 
He turned to face her. 
"I can't go with you," she said. "It all is changed. It is different now." 
"But you said. . ." 
"I know, but that was when the tunnel still was closed, when there seemed no 
chance of it being 
opened. I want to go with you. There's nothing I want more. But now. . ." 
"But now the tunnel's open." 
"It's not only that. Not only that I have a job to do and now can continue with 
that job. It's the 
slugs. Now I know what I am looking for. I have to find the slugs. Find them, 
somehow talk with 
them. They can tell us what we need to know. No more blind probing to learn the 
secret of the 

77
tunnels. Now we know who can tell us what we need to know about them." 
"If you can find them. If you can talk with them. If they will talk with you." 
"I'll have to try," she said. "I'll leave word along the way, messages at many 
other tunnels, 
hoping they will be found by many other searchers, so that if I fail, there'll 
be others who will know 
and carry on the hunt." 
"Carter," said Nicodemus, "you know she has to do it. Much as we might want her 
with us, we 
must recognize. . ." 
"Yes, of course," said Horton. 
"I know you won't, you can't, but I have to ask," she said. "If you'd come with 
me--" 
"You know I can't," said Horton. 
"Yes, I know you can't." 
"So it all comes down to this," said Horton. "There's no way we can change it. 
Our 
commitments--both our commitments--are too deep. We meet, then go our separate 
ways. It is 
almost as if this meeting never happened." 
"That's not right," she said, "and you know it isn't. Our lives, each of our 
lives, have been 
changed a little. We shall remember one another." 
She lifted her face. "Kiss me once," she said. "Kiss me very quickly so there is 
no time to think, 
so I can walk away. . . 

29 
HORTON knelt beside the Pond and lowered the jug into the liquid. The liquid 
gurgled as it 
flowed into the jug. Displaced air made bubbles on the surface. 
When the jug was filled he rose and tucked it underneath his arm. 
"Good-bye, Pond," he said, feeling silly as he said it, for it was not good-bye. 
Pond was going 
with him. 
That was one of the advantages to a thing like Pond, he thought. Pond could go 
many places, yet 
never leave where it had been to start with. As if, he thought, he could have 
gone with Elayne and 
could as well have gone with Ship-- and, come to think of it, have stayed on 
Earth and been dead 
these many centuries. 
"Pond," he asked, "what do you know of death? Do you die? Will you ever die?" 
And that was silly, too, he thought, for everything must die. Someday, perhaps, 
the universe 
would die when the last flicker of energy had been expended and, when that 
happened, time would 
be left alone to brood over the ashes of a phenomenon that might never come 
again. 
Futile, he wondered. Was it all futility? 
He shook his head. He could not bring himself to think so. 
Perhaps the god-hour had an answer. Perhaps that great blue planet knew. 
Someday, perhaps 
millennia from now, Ship, in the black reaches of some distant sector of the 
galaxy, would be told 
or would ferret out the answer. Perhaps- somewhere in the context of that answer 
there might be an 
explanation of the purpose of life, that feeble lichen which clung, sometimes 
despairingly, to the 
tiny flecks of matter floating in an inexplicable immensity that did not know 
nor care that there was 
such a thing as life. 

30 
THE grande dame said, So now the play is done. The drama is run out and we can 
leave this 
cluttered, messy planet for the cleanness that is space. 
The scientist asked, You've fallen in love with space? 
The kind of thing I am, the grande dame told him, I cannot fall in love with 
anything at all. Tell 
me, Sir Monk, what kind of things we are. You are good at coming up with answers 
to such foolish 
questions. 
We are consciousnesses, said the monk. We are awarenesses. That is all we're 
supposed to be, 
but we still -are hanging onto assorted garbages that we once had carried with 
us. Hanging onto 
them because we think they give us identities. And that is the measure of our 
selfishnesses and our 

78
self-conceits--that conformations such as we still must strive for identities. 
And the measure of our 
shortsightedness as well. For there is possible for us a far greater 
identity--the three of us 
together--than the little personal identities we continue to insist upon. We can 
become, if we but 
allow ourselves, a part of the universe--we can become, perhaps, even as the 
universe. 
I declare, said the grande dame, how you do run on. When you get started, there 
never is any 
telling to what lengths you'll let yourself be carried. How can you say we'll 
become part of the 
universe? We have, to start with, no idea of what the universe may be, so how 
can we imagine that 
we'll become much the same as it? 
There is much in what you say, said the scientist, although I do not mean, Sir 
Monk, any criticism 
of your thinking when I say this. I have had, in my private moments, some 
thoughts that are much 
the same, and the thoughts, I must confess, leave me considerably confused. Man 
has historically, I 
believe, looked upon the universe as something that came about through a purely 
mechanistic 
evolution that can be explained, at least in part, by the laws of physics and of 
chemistry. But a 
universe so evolved, being no more than a mechanistic construct, never would 
make anything 
reasonably resembling complete sense since it would not be designed to have any. 
A mechanistic 
concept is supposed to make something work, not to make any kind of sense, and 
it goes against all 
the logic lean muster to think this is the kind of universe we live in. 
Certainly the universe is 
something more than this, although I suppose it is the only way it can be 
explained by a 
technological society. I have asked myself in what ways it might be constructed; 
I have asked myself 
for what purpose it has been constructed. Surely, I tell myself, not as a simple 
receptacle to contain 
matter, space, and time. Certainly it has more significance than this. Was it 
designed, I ask myself, 
as the home of intelligent biological creatures and if this is so, what factors 
have gone into its 
development to make it such a place, in fact what kind of construct should jibe 
to serve such a 
purpose? Or was it built simply as an exercise in philosophy? 
Or possibly as a symbolism that may not be perceived nor appreciated until that 
far-distant day 
when the final distillation of biological evolution has produced some 
unimaginable intelligence that 
may finally know the reason and the purpose of the universe? The question is 
raised, as well, what 
sort of an intelligence would be required to reach such an understanding. There 
must, it seems, 
always be a certain limitation to each evolutionary phase, and there is no way 
one can be sure that 
such a limitation would not rule out the capacity to achieve an intelligence 
necessary to understand 
the universe. 
Perhaps, said the grande dame, the universe is not meant to be understood. This 
fetish for 
understanding may be no more than one mistaken aspect of a technological 
society. 
0r, said the monk, of a philosophical society. Perhaps more true of a 
philosophical society than 
one that is technological, for technology doesn't give a damn just so the 
engines run as the 
equations click together. 
I think you both are wrong, objected the scientist. Any intelligence must care. 
An intelligence must 
necessarily drive itself to the limit of its ability. That is the curse of 
intelligence. It never lets the 
creature that possesses it alone; it never lets him rest; it drives him on and 
on. In the last moment of 
eternity he will be clinging to the ultimate precipice by his fingernails, 
kicking and screaming to 
gather in the final shred of whatever it is that he maybe chasing. And he'll be 
chasing something; 
I'll lay you odds on that. 
You make it sound so grim, the grande dame said. 
At the risk, said the scientist, of sounding somewhat like a stuffed shirt or a 
mindless patriot, I 
might say grim, but glorious. 
None of which points the way for us, said the monk. Are we going to live out 
another millennium 
as three separate, selfish, egotistical identities or are we going to give 
ourselves a chance to 
become something else? I don't know what that something else will be--an equal 
of the universe, 
perhaps the very universe, or something less than that. At the worst, I think, a 
free mind divorced 
from time and matter, able to go anywhere, perhaps anywhen, we wish without 
respect to alt the 
rest of it, rising above the limitations imposed upon our flesh. 
You are selling us short, said the scientist. We have spent only one millennium 
in our present 

79
state. Give us another millennium, give us ten more millennia. 
But it will cost us something, said the grande dame. It will not come for free. 
What price, Sir 
Monk, would you offer for it? 
My fear, said the monk. I have given up my fear and I am glad of it. It is no 
price at all. But it is 
all I have. It is all I have to offer. 
And I my bitchy pride, said the grande dame, and our Master Scientist his 
selfishness. Scientist, 
can you pay your selfishness? 
It would come hard, said the scientist. Perhaps there'll come a time when I'll 
not need my 
selfishness. 
Ah, well, said `the monk, we will have the Pond and the god-hour. Perhaps 
they'll supply moral 
support and maybe some incentive--if no more incentive than to get the hell away 
from them. 
I think, said the grande dame, that we'll finally make it. Not by getting the 
hell, as you say, away 
from something else. I think that in the end the thing we'll want to get away 
from is ourselves. We'll 
become in time so sick of our petty selves that each of us will be glad to merge 
with the other two. 
And maybe we can finally reach that blessed state when we have no selves at all. 


31 
NICODEMUS was waiting by the now-dead campfire when Horton came back from the 
Pond. 
The robot had the packs made up and the Shakespeare volume lay on top of them. 
Horton set the 
jug down carefully, leaning it against the packs. 
"Is there anything else that you want to take?" asked Nicodemus. 
Horton shook his head. "The book and jug," he said. "I guess that's all. The 
ceramics that 
Shakespeare picked up are worthless as they stand. No more than souvenirs. 
Someday someone else will come along, human or otherwise, who will make a study 
of the city. 
Human more than likely. It seems that our species at times may hold an almost 
fatal fascination for 
the past." 
"I can carry both the packs," said Nicodemus, "and the book as well. Carrying 
that jug, you 
shouldn't be encumbered." 
Horton grinned. "I have the awful fear that somewhere along the way something 
will trip me up. I 
can't let that happen. I have Pond in my custody and can let nothing happen to 
him." 
Nicodemus squinted at the jug. "You haven't got much of him there." 
"Enough," said Horton. "A phial of him, a cupful of him probably would be quite 
enough." 
"I don't quite understand," said Nicodemus, "what it is all about." 
"Neither do I," said Horton, "except that I have the feeling I'm carrying a 
jugful of a friend, and 
out here in this howling wilderness of space a man can ask nothing more." 
Nicodemus rose from the woodpile, where he had been sitting. "Pick up the jug," 
he said, "and I'll 
shoulder the rest of it. There's nothing more to keep us." 
Horton made no move to pick up the jug. He stood where he was, slowly looking 
around. "I find 
myself just a bit reluctant," he said. "As if there were something still to do." 

"You're missing Elayne," said Nicodemus. "It would have been nice to have her 
along." 
"There's that," said Horton. "Yes, I do miss her. It was hard to stand and watch 
her walk into the 
tunnel. And there's him as well." He gestured at the skull that hung above the 
door. 
"We can't take him along," said Nicodemus. "That skull would crumble at the 
touch. He won't be 
up there very long. Someday a wind will come along. . ." 
"That's not what I mean," said Horton. "He was here alone so long. And now we'll 
leave him 
alone again." "Carnivore's still here," said Nicodemus. 
Horton said, relieved, "That's right. I hadn't thought of that." 
He stooped and picked up the jug, cradling it carefully in his arms. Nicodemus 
hoisted the packs 
to his back and tucked the book underneath an arm. Turning, he started down the 
path, Horton 
following. 
At the turn in the path Horton turned and looked back at the Grecian house. 
Getting a good grip 
on the jug with one hand, he lifted the other arm in a gesture of farewell. 

80
Good-bye, he said, wordlessly, in his mind. Good-bye, you old stormy 
albatross--you madman, 
brave man, lost man. 
It may have been a trick of shifting light. It may have been something else. 
But, in any case, whatever, from his position above the door, Shakespeare winked 
at him. 


