
    Telempath


    Spider Robinson

This is a work of fiction. All the characters and events portrayed in
this book are fictional, and any resemblance to real people or incidents
is purely coincidental.

Copyright (c) 1976 Spider Robinson


    This book is dedicated
    to Charles and Evelyn for the
    heredity and environment,
    to Jeanne and Luanna for the patience,
    and to the Bearden Bulldogs
    for the sawbuck.


    Winds out on the ocean
    Blowin' wherever they choose.
    The winds ain't got no emotion, babe:
    They don't know the blues.
     James Taylor


    LIFE STINKS

Wendell Morgan Carlson stepped out between the big shattered lamps that
bracketed Butler Hall's front entrance. I put my head down and ran, flat
out, for the greatest killer of all time.

And the first Musky struck.

Terror sleeted through my brain, driving out the rage, as something warm
and invisible plastered itself across my face. I think I screamed then,
but somehow I kept from inhaling as I fell and rolled, dropping the
rifle and tearing useless at the thing on my face. I aimed without
seeing, and the gun bucked in my hand.

The massive gasoline drum between me and the crane went up with awhoom
, and I dove headlong through the flames. The Musky's dying projections
tore at my mind as the creature exploded behind me.

My hindbrain screamedMuskies never travel alone! And before I knew
what I was doing I tore loose my nose plugs to locate my enemy.

Foul stenches smashed my sanity, noxious odors wrenched at my reason, I
was torn, blasted, overwhelmed in abominable ordure. I couldn'tstand
it, it was unbearable,how had I walked, arrogant and unknowing, though
this stinking hell all day  

And with that I remembered why I had come here, and knew I could not
join my brother Izzy in the peaceful, fragrant dark. I could not let
go I had to kill Carlson before I let the blackness claim me.


      BAEN BOOKS by SPIDER ROBINSON

The Star Dancers(with Jeanne Robinson)
Starmind(with Jeanne Robinson)
Deathkiller
Lifehouse

User Friendly

By Any Other Name
Telempath
Callahan's Lady(upcoming)


  MAPS

 

caption:

 

1 The Tool Shed
2 The Pantry
3 Hospital
4 The General Store
5 Security HQ
6 The Ad Building
7 School (P.S. 1)
8 The Gate
9 Theater (planned)
10 Sports Field
11 Town Square & Pond
	
12 Dormitories
a) Hilton b) Sheraton
c) Statler d) HoJo Inn
e) Ritz f) Holiday Inn
13 Public Showers
14 Church
15 Private Homes
a) Store b) Krishnamurti
c) Phinney d) Dalhousie
e) Collaci f) Gowan
16 Stone Study
	
17 Public Beach
18 Motor Pool
19 Factories
20 Munitions
21 Research Labs
22 Distillery
23 Sewage-Methane Converter
24 Fuel Dump
25 Power Plant
26 Water Towers
27 Windmills

 


  CHAPTER ONE


      Excerpt from the Journal of Isham Stone

I hadn't meant to shoot the cat.

I hadn't meant to shoot anything, for that matter the pistol at my hip
was strictly defensive armament at the moment. But my adrenals were on
overtime and my peripheral vision was straining to meet itself behind my
head when something appeared before me with no warning at all my
subconscious sentries opted for the Best Defense. I was down and rolling
before I knew I'd fired, through a doorway I hadn't known was there.

I fetched up with a heart-stopping crash against the foot of a staircase
just inside the door. The impact dislodged something on the first-floor
landing; it rolled heavily down the steps and sprawled across me: the
upper portion of a skeleton, largely intact from the sixth vertebra up.
As I lurched to my feet in horror, long-dead muscle and cartilage
crumbled at last, and random bones skittered across the dusty floor.
Three inches above my left elbow, someone was playing a drum-roll with
knives.

Cautiously I hooked an eye around the doorframe, at about knee-level.
The smashed remains of what had recently been a gray-and-white Persian
tom lay against a shattered fire hydrant whose faded red surface was
spattered with brighter red and less appealing colors. Overworked
imagination produced the odor of singed meat.

I'm as much cat-people as the One-Sleeved Mandarin, and three shocks in
quick succession, in the condition I was in, were enough to override all
the iron discipline of Collaci's training. Eyes stinging, I stumbled out
onto the sidewalk, uttered an unspellable sound, and pumped three slugs
into a wrecked '82 Buick lying on its right side across the street.

I was pretty badly rattled only the third slug hit the exposed gas tank.
But it was magnesium, not lead: the car went up with a very satisfactory
roar and the prettiest fireball you ever saw. The left rear wheel was
blown high in the air; it soared gracefully over my head, bounced off a
fourth-floor fire escape and came down flat and hard an inch behind me.
Concrete buckled.

When my ears had stopped ringing and my eyes uncrossed, I became aware
that I was rigid as a statue.So much for catharsis, I thought vaguely,
and relaxed with an effort that hurt all over.

The cat was still dead.

I saw almost at once why he startled me so badly. The tobacconist's
display window from which he had leaped was completely shattered, so my
subconscious sentries had incorrectly tagged it as one of the rare
unbroken ones. Therefore, they reasoned, the hurtling object must be in
fact emerging from the open door just beyond the window. Anything coming
out a doorway that high from the ground just had to be a Musky, and my
hand ismuch quicker than my eye.

Now that my eye had caught up, of course, I realized that I couldn't
possibly track a Musky by eye. Which was exactly why I'd been keyed up
enough to waste irreplaceable ammo and give away my position in the
first place. Carlson had certainly made life complicated for me. I hoped
I could manage to kill him slowly.

This was no consolation to the cat. I looked down at my Musky-gun, and
found myself thinking of the day I got it, just three months past. The
first Musky-gun I had ever owned myself,mine for as long as it took me
to kill Carlson. After my father had presented it to me publicly, and
formally charged me with the avenging of the human race, the friends and
neighbors and dark-eyed Alia had scurried safely inside for the
ceremonial banquet. But my father took me aside. We walked in silence
past fields of growing corn to Mama's grave, and in the distance the
setting sun over the Mountain looked like a knothole in the wall of
Hell. Dad turned to me at last, pride and paternal concern fighting for
control of his ebony features, and said, "Isham . . . Isham, I wasn't
much older than you when I got my first gun. That was long ago and far
away, in a place callea Montgomery things were different then. But some
things never change." He tugged an earlobe reflectively, and continued,
"Phil Collaci has taught you well, but sometimes he'd rather shoot first
and ask directions later. Isham, you just can't go blazing away
indiscriminately. Notever. You hear me "

The crackling of the fire around the ruined Buick brought me back to the
present. Damn, you called it again, Dad, I thought as I shivered there
on the sidewalk. Youcan't go blazing away indiscriminately.

Not even here in New York City.

It was getting late, and my left arm ached abominably where Grey Brother
had marked me I reminded myself sharply that I was here on business. I
had no wish to pass a night in any city, let alone this one, so I
continued on up the street, examining every building I passed with
extreme care. If Carlson had ears, he now knew someone was in New York,
and he might figure out why. I was on his home territory every alleyway
and manhole was a potential ambush.

There were stores and shops of every conceivable kind, commerce more
fragmented and specialized than I had ever seen before. Some shops dealt
only in asingle item. Some I could make no sense of at all. What the
hell is an "rko" 

I kept to the sidewalk where I could. I told myself I was being foolish,
that I was no less conspicuous to Carlson or a Musky than if I'd stood
on second base at the legendary Shea Stadium, and that the street held
no surprise tomcats. But I kept to the sidewalk where I could. I
remember Mama along time ago telling me not to go in the street or the
monsters would get me.

They got her.

Twice I was forced off the curb, once by a subway entrance and once by a
supermarket. Dad had seen to it that I had the best plugs Fresh Start
had to offer, but they weren'tthat good. Both times I hurried back to
the sidewalk and was thoroughly disgusted with my pulse rate. But I
never looked over my shoulder. Collaci says there's no sense being
scared when it can't help you and the fiasco with the cat proved him right.

It was early afternoon, and the same sunshine that was warming the
forests and dorms and work-zones of Fresh Start, my home, seemed to
chill the air here, accentuating the barren emptiness of the ruined
city. Silence and desolation were all around me as I walked, bleached
bones and crumbling brick. Carlson had been efficient, all right; nearly
as efficient as the atomic bomb folks used to be so scared of once. It
seemed as though I were in some immense devil's autoclave, that ignored
filth and grime but grimly scrubbed out life of any kind.

Wishful thinking,I decided, and shook my head to banish the fantasy.
If the city had been truly lifeless, I'd be approaching Carlson from
uptown I would never have had to detour as far south as the Lincoln
Tunnel, and my left arm would not have ached so terribly. Grey Brother
is extremely touchy about his territorial rights.

I decided to replace the makeshift dressing over the torn biceps. I
didn't like the drumming insistence of the pain: it kept me awake but
interfered with my concentration. I ducked into the nearest store that
looked defensible, and found myself sprawled on the floor behind an
overturned table, wishing mightily that it weren't so flimsy.

Something had moved.

Then I rose sheepishly to my feet, holstering my heater and rapping my
subconscious sentries sharply across the knuckles for the second time in
half an hour. My own face looked back at me from the grimy mirror that
ran along one whole wall, curly black hair in tangles, wide lips
stretched back in what looked just like a grin. It wasn't a grin. I
hadn't realized how bad I looked.

Dad had told me a lot about Civilization, before the Exodus, but I don't
suppose I'll ever understand it. A glance around this room raised more
questions than it answered. On my left, opposite the long mirror, were a
series of smaller mirrors that paralleled it for three-quarters of its
length, with odd-looking chairs before them. Something like armchairs
made of metal, padded where necessary, with levers to raise and lower
them. On my right,**below the longer mirror, were a lot of smaller, much
plainer wooden chairs, in a tight row broken occasionally by strange
frameworks from which lengths of rotting fabric dangled. I could only
surmise that this was some sort of arcane narcissist's paradise, where
men of large ego would come, remove their clothing, recline in
luxuriously upholstered seats, and contemplate their own magnificence.
The smaller, shabbier seats, too low to afford a decent view, no doubt
represented the cut-rate or second-class accommodations.

But what was the significance of the cabinets between the larger chairs
and the wall, laden with bottles and plastic containers and heathen
appliances  And why were all the skeletons in the room huddled together
in the middle of the floor, as though their last seconds of life had
been spent frantically fighting over something 

Something gleamed in the bone-heap, and I saw what the poor bastards had
died fighting for, and knew what kind of place this had been. The
contested prize was a straight razor.

My father had spent eighteen of my twenty years telling me why I ought
to hate Wendell Carlson, and in the past few days I'd acquired nearly as
many reasons of my own. I intended to put them in Carlson's obituary.

A wave of weariness passed over me. I moved to one of the big chairs,
pressed gingerly down on the seat to make sure no cunning mechanism
awaited my mass to trigger it (Collaci's training again if Teach' ever
gets to Heaven, he'll check it for booby traps), took off my rucksack
and sat down. As I unrolled the bandage around my arm I glanced at
myself in the mirror and froze, struck with wonder. An infinite series
ofme s stretched out into eternity, endless thousands of Isham Stones
caught in that frozen second of time that holds endless thousands of
possible futures, on the point of some unimaginable cusp. I knew it was
simply the opposed mirrors, the one before me slightly askew, and could
have predicted the phenomenon had I thought about it but I was not
expecting it and had never seen anything like it in my life. All at once
I was enormously tempted to sit back, light a joint from the first-aid
kit in my rucksack, and meditate awhile. I wondered what Alia was doing
right now, right at this moment. Hell, I could kill Carlson at twilight,
and sleep in his bed or hole up here and get him tomorrow, or the next
day. When I was feeling better.

Then I saw the first image in line. Me. A black man just doesn't bruise
spectacularly, as a rule, but there was something colorful over my right
eye that would do until a bruise came along. I was filthy, I needed a
shave, and the long slash running from my left eye to my upper lip
looked angry. My black turtleneck was torn in three places that I could
see, dirty where it wasn't torn, and bloodstained where it wasn't dirty.
It might be a long time before I felt any better than I did right now.

Then I looked down at what was underneath the gauze I'd just peeled off,
saw the black streaks on the chocolate brown of my arm, and the
temptation to set a spell vanished like an overheated Musky.

I looked closer, and began whistling "Good Morning Heartache" very
softly through my teeth. I had no more neosulfa, damned little bandage
for that matter, and it looked like I should save what analgesics I had
to smoke on the way home. The best thing I could do for myself was to
finish up in the city and get gone, find a Healer before my arm rotted.

And all at once that was fine with me. I remembered the two sacred
duties that had brought me to New York; one to my father and my people,
and one to myself. I had nearly died proving to my satisfaction that the
latter was impossible; the other would keep me no great long time. New
York and I were, as Bierce would say, incompossible.

One way or another, it would all be over soon.

I carefully rebandaged the gangrenous arm, hoisted the rucksack and went
back outside, popping a foodtab and a very small dosage of speed as I
walked. There's no point in bringing real food to New York you can't
taste it anyway and it masses so damned much.

* * *

The sun was perceptibly lower in the sky the day was in catabolism. I
shifted my shoulders to settle the pack and continued on up the street,
my eyes straining to decipher faded signs.

Two blocks up I found a shop that had specialized in psychedelics. A '79
Ford shared the display window with several smashed hookahs and a
narghile or two. I paused there, sorely tempted again. A load of pipes
and papers would be worth a good bit at home; Techno and Agro alike
would pay dearly for fine-tooled smoking goods more evidence that, as
Dad is always saying, technology's usefulness has outlasted it.

But that reminded me of my mission again, and I shook my head savagely
to drive away the daydreaming that sought to delay me. I was what was
the phrase Dad had used at my arming ceremony  "The Hand of Man
Incarnate," that was it, the product of two years' personal combat
training and eighteen years of racial hatred. After I finished the job I
could rummage around in crumbling deathtraps for hash pipes and roach
clips my last detour had nearly killed me, miles to the north.

But I'dhad to try. I was only two at the time of the Exodus, too young
to retain much but a confused impression of universal terror, of random
horror and awful revulsion everywhere. But I remember one incident very
clearly. I remember my brother Israfel, all of eight years old, kneeling
down in the middle of 116^th Street and methodically smashing his head
against the pavement. Long after Izzy's eight-year-old brains had
splashed the concrete, his little body continued to slam the shattered
skull down again and again in a literally mindless spasm of escape. I
saw this over my mother's shoulder as she ran, screaming her fear,
through the chaotically twisting nightmare that for as long as she could
remember had been only a quietly throbbing nightmare; as she ran through
Harlem.

Once when I was twelve I watched a farmer slaughter a chicken, and when
the headless carcass got up and ran about I heard my mother's scream
again. It was coming from my throat. Dad tells me I was unconscious for
four days and woke up screaming.

Even here, even downtown, where the bones sprawled everywhere were those
of strangers, I was wound up tight enough to burst, and ancient reflex
fought with modern wisdom as I felt the irrational impulse to lift my
head and cast about for an enemy's scent. I had failed to recover Izzy's
small bones; Grey Brother, who had always lived in Harlem, now ruled it,
and sharp indeed were his teeth. I had managed to hold off the
chittering pack with incendiaries until I reached the Hudson, and they
would not cross the bridge to pursue me. And so I lived at least until
gangrene got me.

And the only thing between me and Fresh Start was Carlson. I saw again
in my mind's eye the familiar Carlson Poster, the first thing my father
ran off when he got access to a mimeograph machine: a remarkably
detailed sketch of thin, academic features surrounded by a mass of
graying hair, with the legend, "WANTED: FOR THE MURDER OF HUMAN
CIVILIZATION WENDELL MORGAN CARLSON. An unlimited lifetime supply of
hot-shot shells will be given to anyone bringing the above head to the
Council of Fresh Start."

No one ever took Dad up on it at least, no one who survived to collect.
And so it looked like it was up to me to settle the score for a
shattered era and a planetful of corpses. The speed was taking hold now;
I felt an exalted sense of destiny and a fever to be about it. I was the
duly chosen instrument for mankind's revenge, and that reckoning was
long overdue.

I unclipped one of the remaining incendiary grenades from my belt it
comforted me to hold that much raw power in my hand and kept on walking
uptown, feeling infinitely more than twenty years old. And as I stalked
my prey through concrete canyons and brownstone foothills, I found
myself thinking of his crime, of the twisted motives that had produced
this barren jungle and countless hundreds like it. I remembered my
father's eyewitness account of Carlson's actions, repeated so many times
during my youth that I could almost recite it verbatim, heard again the
Genesis of the world I knew from its first historian my father, Jacob
Stone. Yes,that Stone, the one man Carlson never expected to survive,
to shout across a smashed planet the name of its unknown assassin. Jacob
Stone, who first cried the name that became a curse, a blasphemy and a
scream of rage in the throats of all humankind. Jacob Stone, who named
our betrayer: Wendell Morgan Carlson!

And as I reviewed that grim story, I kept my hand near the rifle with
which I hoped to write its happy ending. . . .

 


  CHAPTER TWO


      Excerpts from I Worked With Carlson,
      by Jacob Stone, Ph.D., authorized version: Fresh Start Press 1986
      (Mimeo)

. . . The sense of smell is a curious phenomenon, oddly resistant to
measurement or rigorous analysis. Each life form on Earth appears to
have as much of it as they need to survive, plus a little. The natural
human sense of smell, for instance, was always more efficient than most
people realized, so much so that in the 1880s the delightfully eccentric
Sir Francis Galton had actually succeeded, by associating numbers with
certain scents, intraining himself to add and subtract by smell ,
apparently just for the intellectual exercise.

But through a sort of neurological suppressor circuit of which next to
nothing is known, most people contrived to ignore all but the most
pleasing or disturbing of the messages their noses brought them, perhaps
by way of reaction to a changing world in which a finely-tuned olfactory
apparatus became a nuisance rather than a survival aid. The level of
sensitivity which a wolf requires to find food would be a hindrance to a
civilized human packed into a city of his fellows.

By 1982, Professor Wendell Carlson had raised olfactometry to the level
of a precise science. In the course of testing the theories of Beck and
Miles, Carlson almost absentmindedly perfected the classic
"blast-injection" technique of measuring differential sensitivity in
olfaction,without regard for the subjective impressions of the test
subject. This not only refined his data, but also enabled him to work
with life forms other than human, a singular advantage when one
considers how much of the human brain is terra incognita.

His first subsequent experiments indicated that the average wolf
utilized his sense of smell on the order of a thousand times more
efficiently than a human. Carlson perceived that wolves lived in a world
of scents, as rich and intricate as our human worlds of sight and word.
To his surprise, however, he discovered that thepotential sensitivity
of the human olfactory apparatus far outstripped that of any known species.

This intrigued him . . .

* * *

. . . Wendell Morgan Carlson, the greatest biochemist Columbia and
perhaps the world had ever seen, was living proof of the truism that a
genius can be a damned fool outside his own specialty.

Genius he unquestionably was; it wasnot serendipity that brought him
the Nobel Prize for isolating a cure for the entire spectrum of virus
infections called "the common cold." Rather it was the sort of inspired
accident that comes only to those brilliant enough to perceive it,
fanatic seekers like Pasteur.

But Pasteur was a boor and a braggart,who frittered away valuable time
in childish feuds with men unfit to wash out his test tubes. Genius is
seldom a good character reference.

Carlson was a left-wing radical.

Worse, he was the type of radical who dreams of romantic exploits in a
celluloid underground: grim-eyed rebels planting homemade bombs,
assassinating the bloated oppressors in their very strongholds and
(although he certainly knew what hydrogen sulfide was) escaping through
the city sewers.

It never occurred to him that it takes a very special kind of man to be
a guerilla. He was convinced that the moral indignation he had acquired
at Washington in '71 (during his undergraduate days) would see him
through hardship and privation, and he would have been horrified if
someone had pointed out to him that Che Guevara seldom had access to
toilet paper. Never having experienced hunger, he thought it a glamorous
state. He lived a compartmentalized life, and his wild talent for
biochemistry had the thickest walls: only within them was he capable of
logic or true intuition. He had spent a disastrous adolescent year in a
seminary, enlisted as a "storm trooper of Mary," and had come out of it
apostate but still saddled with a relentless need to Serve A Cause and
it chanced that the cry in 1982 was, once again, "Revolution Now!"

He left the cloistered halls of Columbia in July of that year, and
applied to the smaller branch the so-called "Action-Faction" of the New
Weathermen for a position as assassin. Fortunately he was taken for
crazy and thrown out. The African Liberation Front was somewhat less
discerning they broke his leg in three places. In the Emergency Room of
Jacobi Hospital, Carlson came to the conclusion that the trouble with
Serving A Cause was that it involved associating with unperceptive and
dangerously unpredictable people. What he needed was a One-Man Cause.

And then, at the age of thirty-two, his emotions noticed his intellect
for the first time.

When the two parts of him came together, they achieved critical mass and
that was a sad day for the world. I myself bear part of the blame for
that coming together unwittingly I provided one of the final sparks, put
forward the idea which sent Carlson on the most dangerous intuitive leap
of his life. My own feelings of guilt for this will plague me to my
dying day and yet it might have been anyone. Or no one.

* * *

Fresh from a three-year stint doing biowar research for the Defense
Department, I was a very minor colleague of Carlson's, but quickly found
myself becoming a close friend. Frankly I was flattered that a man of
his stature would speak to me, and I suspect Carlson was overjoyed to
find a black man who would treat him as an equal.

But for reasons which are very difficult to explain to anyone who did
not live through that period and which need no explanation for those who
did I was reluctant to discuss the A.L.F. with a honky, however
"enlightened." And so when I went to visit Carlson in Jacobi Hospital
and the conversation turned to the self-defeating nature of
uncontrollable rage, I attempted to distract the patient with a hasty
change of subject.

"The Movement's turning rancid, Jake," Carlson had just muttered, and an
excellent digression occurred to me.

"Wendell," I said heedlessly, "do you realize that you personally are in
a position to make this a better world "

His eyes lit up. "How's that "

"You are probably the world's greatest authority on olfactometry and the
human olfactory apparatus among other things right "

"As far as there is one, I suppose so. What of it " He shifted uneasily
within his traction gear: wearing his radicalpersona , he was made
uncomfortable by reference to his scientist-mode. He felt it had little
to do with the Realities of Life like nightsticks and grand juries.

"Has it ever occurred to you," I persisted to my everlasting regret,
"that nearly all the undesirable by-products of twentieth-century
living Technological Man's most unlovable aspects quite literallystink
  The wholeworld's going rancid, Wendell, not just the Movement:
automobiles, factory pollution, crowded cities Wendell, why couldn't you
develop a selective suppressant for the sense of smell controlled
anosmia  Oh, I know a snort of formaldehyde will do the trick, and
having your adenoids removed sometimes works. But a man oughtn't to have
to give up the smell of frying bacon just to survive in New York. And
you know we're reaching that pass in the past few years it hasn't been
necessary to leave the city and then return to be aware of how evil it
smells. The natural suppressor-mechanism in the brain whatever it is has
gone about as far as it can go. Why don't you devise a small-spectrum
filter to aid it  It would be welcomed by sanitation workers,
engineers why, it would be a godsend to the man on the street!"

Carlson was mildly interested. Such an anosmic filter would be both a
mordant political statement and a genuine boon to mankind. He had been
vaguely pleased by the success of his cold cure, and I believe he
sincerely wished to make the world a happier place however perverted his
methods tended to be. We discussed the idea at some length, and I left.

Had Carlson not been bored silly in the hospital, he would never have
rented a television set. It was extremely unfortunate that the "Late
Show" (ed. note: a television show of the period) that evening featured
the film version of Alistair MacLean'sThe Satan Bug . Watching this
absurd production, Carlson was intellectually repelled by the notion
that a virus could be isolated so hellishly virulent that "a teaspoon of
it would sweep the earth of life in a few days."

But it gave him a wild idea a fancy, a fantasy, and a tasty one.

He checked with me by phone the next day, very casually, and I assured
him from my experiences with advances in virus-vectoring that MacLean
hadnot been whistling in the dark. In fact, I told him, modern
so-called "bacterial warfare" made the Satan Bug look like child's play.
Carlson thanked me and changed the subject.

On his release from the hospital, he came to my office and asked me to
work with him for a full year, to the exclusion of all else, on a
project whose nature he was reluctant to discuss. "Why do you need me "
I asked, puzzled.

"Because," he finally told me, "you know how to make a Satan Bug. I
intend to make a God Bug. And you could help me."

"Huh "

"Listen, Jake," he said with that delightful informality of his. "I've
licked the common cold and there are still herds of people with the
sniffles. All I could think of to do with the cure was to turn it over
to the pharmaceuticals people, and I did all I could to make sure they
didn't milk it, but there are still suffering folks who can't afford the
damned stuff. Well, there's no need for that. Jake, a cold will kill
someone sufficiently weakened by hunger I can't help the hunger, but I
could eliminate colds from the planet in forty-eight hours . . . with
your help."

"A benevolent virus-vector . . ." I was flabbergasted, as much by the
notion of decommercializing medicine as by the specific nostrum involved.

"It'd be a lot of work," Carlson went on. "In its present form my stuff
isn't compatible with such a delivery system I simply wasn't thinking
along those lines. But I'll bet it could be made so, with your help.
Those pharmaceuticals goniffs have made me rich enough to pay you twice
what Columbia does, and we're both due for sabbatical anyway. What do
you say "

I thought it over, but not enough. The notion of collaborating with a
Nobel Prize winner was simply too tempting. "All right, Wendell."

* * *

. . . We set up operations in Carlson's laboratory-home on Long Island,
he in the basement and myself on the main floor. There we worked like
men possessed for the better part of a year, cherishing private dreams
and slaughtering guinea pigs by the tens of thousands. Carlson was a
stern if somewhat slapdash taskmaster, and as our work progressed he
began looking over my shoulder, learning my field while discouraging
inquiries about his own progress. I assumed that he simply knew his
field too well to converse intelligently about it with anyone but
himself. And yet he absorbed all my own expertise with fluid rapidity,
until eventually it seemed that he knew as much about virology as I did
myself. One day he disappeared with no explanation, and returned a week
or two later with what seemed to me a more nasal voice.

And near the end of the year there came a day when he called me on the
telephone. I was spending the weekend, as always, with my wife and two
sons in Harlem. Christmas was approaching, and Barbara and I were
discussing the relative merits of plastic and natural trees when the
phone rang. I was not at all surprised to hear Carlson's reedy voice, so
reminiscent of an oboe lately the only wonder was that he had called
during conventional waking hours.

"Jake," he began without preamble, "I haven't the time or inclination to
argue, so shut up and listen, right  Right. I advise and strongly urge
you to take your family and leave New Yorkat once  steal a car if you
have to, or hijack a Greyhound (ed. note: a public transportation
conveyance) for all of me, but be at least twenty miles away by midnight."

"But "

". . . head north if you want my advice, and for God's sake stay away
from all cities, towns, and people in any number. If you possibly can,
get upwind of all nearby industry, and bring along all the formaldehyde
you can a gun too, if you own one. Good-bye, my friend, and remember I
do this for the greater good of mankind. I don't know if you'll
understand that, but I hope so."

"Wendell, what in the name ofGod are you  " I was talking to a dead phone.

Barbara was beside me, a worried look on her face, my son Isham in her
arms. "What is it, Jacob "

"I'm not sure," I said unsteadily, "but I think Wendell has come
unhinged. I must go to him. Stay with the children; I'll be back as
quickly as I can. And Barbara . . ."

"Yes "

"I know this sounds insane, but pack a bag and be ready to leave townat
once if I call and tell you to."

"Leave town  Without you "

"Yes, just that. Leave New York and never return. I'm virtually certain
you won't have to, but it's just possible that Wendell knows what he's
talking about. If he does, I'll meet you at the cabin by the lake, as
soon as I can." I put off her questions then and left, heading for Long
Island.

When I reached Carlson's home in Old Westbury I let myself in with my
key and made my way toward his laboratory. But I found him upstairs in
mine, perched on a stool, gazing intently at a flask in his right hand.
Its interior swirled, changing color as I watched.

Carlson looked up. "You're a damned fool, Jake," he said quietly before
I could speak. "I gave you a chance."

"Wendell, what on earth is this all about  My wife is scared half to . . ."

"Remember that controlled-anosmia you told me about when I was in the
hospital " he went on conversationally. "You said the trouble with the
world is that it stinks, right "

I stared at him, vaguely recalling my words.

"Well," he said, "I've got a solution."

And Carlson told me what he held in his hand. A single word.

I snapped, just completely snapped. I charged him, clawing wildly for
his throat, and he struck me with his left hand, his faceted ring giving
me the scar I bear to this day, knocking me unconscious. When I came to
my senses I was alone, alone with a helpless guilt that careened
yammering through the halls of my reason and a terror that clutched at
my bowels. A note lay on the floor beside me, in Wendell's sprawling
hand, telling me that I had by my watch another hour's grace. At once I
ran to the phone and wasted ten minutes trying to call Barbara. I could
not get through trunk failure, the operator said. Gibbering, I took all
the formaldehyde I could find in both labs and a self-contained
breathing rig from Carlson's, stepped out into the streetlit night and
set about stealing a car.

It took me twenty minutes not bad for a first attempt but still cutting
it fine. I barely made it to Manhattan, with superb traffic conditions
to help me, before the highway became a butcher shop.

At precisely nine o'clock, Wendell Morgan Carlson stood on the roof of
Columbia's enormous Butler Library, held high in the air by fake Greek
columns and centuries of human thought, gazing north across a quadrangle
within which grass and trees had nearly given up trying to grow, toward
the vast domed Low Library and beyond toward the ghetto in which my wife
and children were waiting, oblivious. In his hands he held the flask I
had failed to wrest from him, and within it were approximately two
teaspoons of an infinitely refined and concentrated virus culture. It
was the end result of our year's work, and it duplicated what the
military had spent years and billions to obtain: a strain of virus that
could blanket the globe in about forty-eight hours. There was no
antidote for it, no vaccine, no defense of any kind for virtually all of
humanity. It was diabolical, immoral and quite efficient. On the other
hand, it was not lethal.

Not, that is, in and of itself. But Carlson had concluded, like so many
before him, that a few million lives was an acceptable price for saving
the world, and so at 9:00 P.M. on December 17, 1984, he leaned over the
parapet of Butler Hall and dropped his flask six long stories to the
concrete below. It shattered on impact and sprayed its contents into
what dismal breeze still blew through the campus.

Carlson had said one word to me that afternoon, and the word was
"Hyperosmia."

Within forty-eight hours every man, woman and child left alive on earth
possessed a sense of smell approximately a hundred times more efficient
than that of any wolf that ever howled.

During those forty-eight hours, a little less than a fifth of the
planet's population perished, by whatever means they could devise, and
every city in the world spilled its remaining life into the surrounding
countryside. The ancient smell-suppressing system of the human brain
collapsed under unbearable demand, overloaded and burned out in an instant.

The great complex behemoth called Modern Civilization ground to a halt
in a little less than two days. In the last hours, those pitiably few
city-dwellers on the far side of the globe who were rigorous enough of
thought to heed and believe the brief bewildered death-cries of the
great mass media strove valiantly and hopelessly to effect emergency
measures. The wiser attempted, as I had, to deaden their senses of smell
with things like formaldehyde, but there is a limit to the amount of
formaldehyde that even desperate men can lay hands on in a day or less,
and its effects are generally temporary. Others with less vision opted
for airtight environments if they could get them, and there they soon
died, either by asphyxiation when their air supply ran out or by suicide
when, fervently hoping they had outlived the virus, they cracked their
airlocks at last. It was discovered that human technology had produced
no commonly available nose-plug worth a damn, nor any air-purification
system capable of filtering out Carlson's virus. Mankind failed utterly
to check the effects of the ghastly Hyperosmic Plague, and the Exodus
began. . . .

. . . I don't believe Carlson rejoiced over the carnage that ensued,
though a strict Malthusian might have considered it as a long-overdue
pruning. But it is easy to understand why he thought it was necessary,
to visualize the "better world" for which he spent so many lives: Cities
fallen to ruin. Automobiles rotting where they stood. Heavy industry
gone to join the dinosaurs. The synthetic-food industry utterly undone.
Perfume what it had always been best a memory as well as tobacco. A wave
of cleanliness sweeping the globe, and public flatulence at last a
criminal offense, punishable by death. Secaucus, New Jersey abandoned to
the buzzards. The back-to-nature communalists achieving their
apotheosis, helping to feed and instruct bewildered urban survivors
(projected catch-phrase: "If you don't like hippies, next time you're
hungry, call a cop"). The impetus of desperation forcing new
developments in production of power by sun, wind and water rather than
inefficient combustion of more precious resources. The long-delayed
perfection of plumbing. And a profoundly interesting and far-reaching
change in human mating customs as feigned interest or disinterest became
unviable pretenses. (As any wolf could have told us, the scent of desire
can be neither faked nor masked).

All in all an observer as impartial as Carlson imagined himself to be
might have predicted that an ultimate cost of perhaps thirty to forty
percent of its population (no great loss), the world ten or twenty years
after Carlson would be a much nicer place to live in.

Instead and in fact, there are four billion fewer people living in it,
and this year Two A.C. we have achieved only a bare possibility of
survival at a cost of eighty to ninety percent of our number.

The first thing Carlson could not have expected claimed over a billion
and a half lives within the first month of the Brave New World. His
compartmentalized mind had not been monitoring current developments in
the field of psychology, a discipline he found frustrating. And so he
was not aware of the work of Lynch and others, conclusively
demonstrating that autism was the result of sensory overload. Autistic
children, Lynch had proved, were victims of a physiochemical imbalance
which disabled their suppressor circuitry for sight, hearing, touch,
smell, or any combination thereof, flooding their brains with an
intolerable avalanche of useless data and shocking them into retreat.
Lysergic acid diethylamide is said to produce a similar effect, on a
smaller scale.

The Hyperosmic Virus produced a similar effect, on a larger scale.
Within weeks, millions of near-catatonic adults and children perished
from malnutrition, exposure, or accidental injury. Why some survived the
shock and adapted, while some did not, remains a mystery, although there
exist scattered data suggesting that those whose sense of smell was
already relatively acute suffered most.

The second thing Carlson could not have expected was The War.

The War had been ordained by the plummeting fall of his flask, but he
may perhaps be excused for not foreseeing it. It was not such a war as
has ever been seen on earth before in all recorded history, humans
versus each other or subordinate life forms. There was nothing for the
confused, scattered survivors of the Hyperosmic Plague to fight over,
few unbusy enough to fight over it; and with lesser life forms we are
nowbetter equipped to compete. No, war broke out between us bewildered
refugees and the Muskies.

It is difficult for us to imagine today how it was possible for the
human race to know of the existence of Muskies for so long without ever
believing in them. Countless humans reported contact with Muskies who at
various times were called "ghosts," "poltergeists," "leprechauns,"
"fairies," "gremlins," and a host of other misleading labels and
notone of these thousands of witnesses was believed by humanity at
large. Some of us saw our cats staring intently at nothing and not one
of us drew the obvious conclusion. In its arrogance the race assumed
that the peculiar perversion of entropy called "life" was the exclusive
property of solids and liquids.

Even today we know very little about the Muskies, save that they are
gaseous in nature and perceptible only by smell. The interested reader
may wish to examine Dr. Michael Gowan's ground-breaking attempt at a
psychological analysis of these entirely alien creatures,Riders of the
Wind (Fresh Start Press, 1985).

One thing we do know is that they are capable of an incredible and
unnerving playfulness. While not true telepaths, Muskies can project and
often impose mood patterns over short distances, and for centuries they
seem to have delighted in scaring the daylights out of random humans.
Perhaps they laughed like innocent children as women to whom their
pranks were attributed were burned at the stake in Massachusetts. Dr.
Gowan suggests that this aspect of their racial psyche is truly
infantile he feels their race is still in its infancy. As, perhaps, is
our own.

But in their childishness, Muskies can be dangerous both deliberately
and involuntarily. Years ago, before the Exodus, people used to wonder
why a race that could plan a space station couldn't design a safe
airliner the silly things used to fall out of the sky with appalling
regularity. Often it was simply sheer bad engineering, but I suspect
that at least as often a careless, drifting Musky, riding the trades
lost in God knows what wildlyalien thoughts, was sucked into the air
intake of a hurtling jetliner and burst the engine asunder as it died.
It was this guess which led me to theorize that extreme heat might
disrupt and kill Muskies, and this gave us our first and so far only
weapon in the bitter war that still rages between us and the wind-riders.

For, like many children, Muskies are dangerously paranoid. Almost at the
instant they realized that men could somehow now perceive them directly,
they attacked, with a ferocity that bespoke blind panic. They learned
quickly how best to kill us: by clamping itself somehow to a man's face
and forcing him to breathe it in, a Musky can lay waste to his
respiratory system. The only solution under combat conditions is a
weapon which fires a projectile hot enough to explode a Musky and that
is a flawed solution. If you fail to burn a Musky in time, before it
reaches you, you may be faced with the unpleasant choice of wrecking
your lungs or blowing off your face. All too many Faceless Ones roam the
land, objects of horror and pity, supported by fellow men uncomfortably
aware that it could happen to them tomorrow.

Further, we Technos here at Fresh Start, dedicated to rebuilding at
least a minimum technology, must naturally wear our recently developed
nose-plugs for long intervals while doing Civilized work. We therefore
toil in constant fear that at any moment we may feel alien projections
of terror and dread, catch even through our plugs the characteristic
odor that gives Muskies their name, and gasp our lungs out in the final
spasms of death.

God knows how Muskies communicate or even if they do. Perhaps they
simply have some sort of group-mind or hive mentality. What would
evolution select for a race of gas clouds spinning across the earth on
the howling mistral  Someday we may devise a way to take one prisoner
and study it; for the present we are content to know that they can be
killed. A good Musky is a dead Musky.

Some day we may climb back up the ladder of technological evolution
enough to carry the battle to the Muskies' home ground; for the present
we are at least becoming formidable defenders.

Some day we may have the time to seek out Wendell Morgan Carlson and
present him with a bill; for the present we are satisfied that he dares
not show himself outside New York City, where legend has him hiding from
the consequences of his actions.

 


  CHAPTER THREE


      From the Journal of Isham Stone

. . . but my gestalt of the eighteen years that had brought me on an
intersecting course with my father's betrayer was nowhere near as
pedantically phrased as the historical accounts Dad had written. In
fact, I had refined it down to four words.

God damn you, Carlson! 

Nearly mid-afternoon, now. The speed was wearing off; time was short.
Broadway got more depressing as I went. Have you ever seen abusfull of
skeletons with pigeons living in it  My arm ached like hell, and a
muscle in my thigh had just announced it was sprained I acquired a
slight but increasing limp. The rucksack gained an ounce with every
step, and I fancied that my right plug was leaking the barest trifle
around the flange. I couldn't say I felt first-rate.

I kept walking north.

I came to Columbus Circle, turned on a whim into Central Park. It was an
enclave of life in this concrete land of death, and I could not pass it
by even though my intellect warned that I might encounter a Doberman who
hadn't seen a Doggie Chew in twenty years.

The Exodus had been good to this place at least it was lush with
vegetation now that swarming humans no longer smothered its natural urge
to be alive. Elms and oaks reached for the clouds with the same optimism
of the maples and birches around Fresh Start, and the overgrown grasses
were the greenest things I had seen in New York. And yet in places the
grass was dead, and there were dead bushes and shrubs scattered here and
there. Perhaps first impressions were deceiving perhaps a small parcel
of land surrounded by an enormous concrete crypt was not a viable
ecology after all. Then again, perhaps neither was Fresh Start.

I was getting depressed again.

I pocketed the grenade I still held and sat down on a park bench,
telling myself that a rest would do wonders for my limp. After a time
static bits of scenery moved the place was alive. There were cats, and
gaunt starved dogs of various breeds, apparently none old enough to know
what a man was. I found their confidence refreshing like I say, I'm a
peaceful-type assassin. Gregarious as hell.

I glanced about, wondering why so many of the comparatively few human
skeletons here had been carrying weapons on the night of the Exodus why
go armed in a park  Then I heard a cough and looked around, and for a
crazy second I thought I knew.

A leopard.

I recognized it from pictures in Dad's books, and I knew what it was and
what it could do. But my adrenaline system was tired of putting my gun
in my fist I sat perfectly still and concentrated on smelling friendly.
My hand-weapon was designed for high temperature, not stopping power;
grenades are ineffective against a moving target; and I was leaning back
against my rifle but that isn't why I sat still. I had learned that day
that lashing out is not an optimum response to fear.

And so I took enough of a second look to realize that this leopard was
incredibly ancient, hollow-bellied and claw-scarred, more noble than
formidable. If wild game had been permitted to roam in Central Park, Dad
would have told me he knew my planned route. Yet this cat seemed old
enough to predate the Exodus. I was certain he knew me for a man. I
suppose he had escaped from a zoo in the confusion of the time, or
perhaps he was some rich person's pet. I understand they had such things
in the Old Days. Seems to me a leopard'd be more trouble than an
eagle Dad kept one for four years and I never had so much grief over
livestock before or since. Dad used to say it was the symbol of
something great that had died, but I thought it was ornery.

This old cat seemed friendly enough, though, now that I noticed. He
looked patriarchal and wise, and he looked awful hungry, if it came to
that. I made a gambler's decision for no reason that I can name.
Slipping off my rucksack slowly and deliberately, I got out a few
foodtabs, took four steps toward the leopard and sat on my heels,
holding out the tablets in offering.

Instinct, memory, or intuition, the big cat recognized my intent and
loped my way without haste. Somehow the closer he got the less scared I
got, until he was nuzzling my hand with a maw that could have amputated
it. Iknow the foodtabs didn't smell like anything, let alone food, but
he understood in some empathic way what I was offering or perhaps he
felt the symbolic irony of two ancient antagonists, black man and
leopard, meeting in New York City to share food. He ate them all,
without nipping my fingers. His tongue was startlingly rough and
rasping, but I didn't flinch or need to. When he was done he made a
noise that was a cross between a cough and a snore and butted my leg
with his head.

He was old, but powerful; I rocked backward and fell off my heels. I
landed correctly, of course, but I didn't get back up again. My strength
left me and I lay there gazing at the underside of the park bench.

For the first time since I entered New York, I had communicated with a
living thing and been answered in kind, and somehow that knowledge took
my strength from me. I sprawled on the turf and waited for the ground to
stop heaving, astonished to discover how weak I was and in how many
places I hurt unbearably. I said some words that Collaci had taught me,
and they helped some but not enough. The speed had worn off faster than
it should have, and there was no more.

It looked like it was time for a smoke. I argued with myself as I
reached overhead to get the first-aid kit from the rucksack, but I saw
no alternative. Carlson was not a trained fighter, had never had a
teacher like Collaci: I could take him buzzed. And I might not get to my
feet any other way.

The joint I selected was needle-slender more than a little cannabis
would do me more harm than good. I had no mind to get wasted inthis
city. I lit up with my coil lighter and took a deep lungful, held it as
long as I could. Halfway through the second toke the leaves dancing
overhead began to sparkle, and my weariness got harder to locate. By the
third I knew of it only by hearsay, and the last hit began melting the
pains of my body as warm water melts snow. Nature's own analgesic, gift
of the earth.

I started thinking about the leopard, who was lying down himself now,
washing his haunches. He was magnificent in decay something about his
eyes said that he intended to live forever or die trying. He was the
only one of his kind in his universe, and I could certainly identify
with that I'd always felt different from the other cats myself.

And yet I was kin to those who had trapped him, caged him, exhibited him
to the curious and then abandoned him to die half a world away from his
home. Why wasn't he trying to kill me  In his place I might have acted
differently. . . .

With the clarity of smoke-logic I followed the thought through. At one
time the leopard's ancestors had tried to kill mine, andeat them, and
yet there was no reason for me to hatehim . Killing him wouldn't help
my ancestors. Killing me would accomplish nothing for the leopard, make
his existence no easier . . . except by a day's meal, and I had given
him that.

What then, I thought uneasily,will my killing Carlson accomplish  It
could not put the Hyperosmic Virus back in the flask, nor save the life
of any now living. Why come all this way to kill 

It was not, of course, a new thought. The question had arisen several
times during my training in survival and combat. Collaci insisted on
debating philosophy while he was working you over, and expected reply;
he maintained that a man who couldn't hold up his end of the
conversation while fighting for his life would never make a really
effective killer. You could pause for thought, but if he decided you
were just hoarding your wind, he stopped pulling his punches.

One day we had no special topic, and I voiced my self-doubts about the
mission I was training for. What good would killing Carlson do, I asked
Collaci. Teach' disengaged and stood back, breathing a little hard, and
grinned his infrequent wolf's grin.

"Survival has strange permutations, Isham. Revenge is a uniquely human
attribute somehow we find it easier to bury our dead when we have
avenged them. We have many dead." He selected a toothpick, stuck it into
his grin. "And for your father's sake it has to be you who does it only
if his son provides his expiation can Dr. Stone grant himself
absolution. Otherwise I'd go kill that silly bastard myself." And
without warning, he had tried, unsuccessfully, to break my collarbone.

And so now I sat tired, hungry, wounded and a little stoned in the
middle of an enormous island mausoleum, asking myself the question I had
next asked Collaci, while trying unsuccessfully to cave in his rib cage:
is it moral or ethical to kill a man 

Across the months, his answer came back:Perhaps not, but it is
sometimes necessary.  

And with that thought my strength came to me and I got to my feet. My
thoughts were as slick as wet soap, within reach but skittering out of
my grasp. I grabbed one from the tangle and welded it to me savagely:I
will kill Wendell Morgan Carlson. It was enough.

And saying good-bye to the luckier leopard, who could never be hagridden
by ancient ghosts, I left the park and continued on up Broadway, as
alert and deadly as I knew how to be.

* * *

When I reached 114^th Street, I looked above the rooftops, and there it
was: a thin column of smoke north and a little east, toward Amsterdam
Avenue. Legend and my father's intuition had been right. Carlson was
holed up where he had always felt most secure the academic womb-bag of
Columbia. I felt a grin pry my face open. It would all be over soon now,
and I could go back to being me whoever that was.

I left the rucksack under a station wagon and considered my situation. I
had three hot-shots left in my Musky-killing handgun, three incendiary
grenades clipped to my belt, and the scope-sighted sniper rifle with
which I planned to kill Carlson. The latter held a full clip of eight
man-killing slugs seven more than I needed. I checked the action and
jacked a slug into the chamber.

There was a detailed map of the Morningside Campus in my pack but I
didn't bother to get it out I had its twin brother in my head. Although
neither Teach' nor I had entirely shared Dad's certainty that Carlson
would be at Columbia, I had spent hours studying the campus maps he gave
me as thoroughly as the New York City street maps that Collaci had
provided. It seemed the only direct contribution Dad could make to my
mission.

It looked as though his effort had paid off.

I wondered whether Carlson was expecting me. I wasn't sure if the sound
of the cat I'd shot downtown could have traveled this far, nor whether
an explosion in a city full of untended gas mains was unusual enough to
put Carlson on his guard. Therefore I had to assume that it could have
and it was. Other men had come to New York to deal with Carlson, as
independents, and none had returned.

My mind was clicking efficiently now, all confusion gone. I was eager. A
car-swiped lamppost leaned drunkenly against a building, and I briefly
considered taking to the rooftops for maximum surprise factor. But
rooftops are prime Musky territory, and besides I didn't have strength
for climbing.

I entered the campus at the southwest, though the 115^th Street gate. As
my father had predicted, it was locked only the main gates at 116^th
were left open at night in those days, and it was late at night when
Carlson dropped his flask. But the lock was a simple Series 10 American
that might have made Teach' laugh out loud. I didn't laugh out loud. It
yielded to the second pick I tried, and I slipped through the barred
iron gate without a sound having thought to oil the hinges.

A flight of steps led to a short flagstone walkway, gray speckled
hexagons in mosaic, a waist-high wall on either side. The walkway ran
between Furnald and Ferris Booth Halls and, I knew, opened onto the
great inner quadrangle of Columbia. Leaves lay scattered all about, and
trees of all kinds thrashed in the lusty afternoon breeze, their leaves
a million green pinwheels.

I hugged the right wall until it abutted a taller perpendicular wall.
Easing around that, I found myself before the great smashed glass and
stone facade of Ferris Booth Hall, the student activities center,
staring past it toward Butler Library, which I was seeing from the west
side. There was a good deal of heavy construction equipment in the
way one of the many student groups that had occupied space in Booth had
managed to blow up itself and a sizable portion of the building in 1983,
and rebuilding had still been in progress on Exodus Day. A massive crane
stood before the ruined structure, surrounded by stacks of brick and
pipe, a bulldozer, storage shacks, a few trucks, a two-hundred-gallon
gasoline tank and a pair of construction trailers.

But my eyes looked past all the conventional hardware to a curious
device beyond them, directly in front of Butler Library and nearly
hidden by overgrown hedges. I couldn't have named it it looked like an
octopus making love to a console stereo but it obviously didn't come
with the landscaping. Dad's second intuition was also correct: Carlson
was using Butler for his base of operations. God knew what the device
was for, but a man without his adenoids in a city full of Muskies and
hungry German Shepherds would not have built it further from home than
could be helped. This was the place.

I drew in a great chest- and belly-full of air, and my grin hurt my
cheeks. I held up my rifle and watched my hands. Rock steady.

Carlson, you murdering bastard,I thought,this is it. The human race
has found you, and its Hand is near. A few more breaths and you die
violently, old man, like a harmless cat in a smokeshop window, like an
eight-year-old boy on a Harlem sidewalk, like a planetwide civilization
you thought you could improve on. Get you ready.  

I moved forward.

Wendell Morgan Carlson stepped out between the big shattered lamps that
bracketed Butler Hall's front entrance. I saw him plainly in profile,
features memorized from the Carlson Poster and my father's sketches,
recognizable in the afternoon light even through white beard and tangled
hair. He glanced my way, flinched, and ducked back inside a split second
ahead of my first shot.

Determined to nail him before he could reach a weapon and dig in, I put
my head down and ran, flat out, for the greatest killer of all time.

And the first Musky struck.

Terror sleeted through my brain, driving out the rage, and something
warm and intangible plastered itself across my face. I think I screamed
then, but somehow I kept from inhaling as I fell and rolled, dropping
the rifle and tearing uselessly at the thing on my face. The last thing
I saw before invisible gases seared my vision was the huge crane beside
me on the right, its long arm flung at the sky like a signpost to
Heaven. Then the world shimmered and faded, and I clawed my pistol from
its holster. I aimed without seeing, my finger spasmed, and the gun
bucked in my hand.

The massive gasoline drum between me and the crane went up with
awhoom! and I sobbed in relief as I heaved to my feet and dove
headlong through the flames. The Musky's dying projections tore at my
mind and I rolled clear, searing my lungs with a convulsive inhalation
as the Musky exploded behind me. Even as I smashed into the fender of
the crane, my hindbrain screamedMuskies never travel alone! and before
I knew what I was doing I tore loose my plugs to locate my enemy.

Foul stenches smashed my sanity; noxious odors wrenched at my reason. I
was torn, blasted, overwhelmed in abominable ordure. The universe was
offal, and the world I saw was remote and unreal. My eyes saw the
campus, but told me nothing of the rank flavor of putrefaction that lay
upon it. They saw sky, but spoke nothing of the reeking layers of
indescribable decay of which it was made. Even allowing for a greenhouse
effect, it was much worse than it should have been after twenty years,
just as legend had said. I tasted excrement, I tasted metal, I tasted
the flavor of the world's largest charnel house, population seven
millions, and I writhed on the concrete. Forgotten childhood memories of
the Exodus burst in my brain and reduced me to a screaming, whimpering
child. I couldn'tstand it, it was unbearable.How had I walked,
arrogant and unknowing, through this stinking hell all day   

And with that I thought I remembered why I had come here, and knew I
could not join Izzy in the peaceful, fragrant dark. I could not let go I
had to kill Carlson before I let the blackness have me. Courage flowed
from God-knows-where, feeding on black hatred and the terrible fear that
I would let my people down, let my father down. I stood up and inhaled
sharply, through my nose.

The nightmare world sprang into focus and time came to a halt.

There were six Muskies, skittering about before Butler as they sought to
bend the breezes to their will.

I had three hot-shots and three grenades.

One steadied, banked my way. I fired from the hip and he flared out of
existence.

A second caught hold of a prevailing current and came in like an express
train. Panic tore through my mind, and I laughed and aimed and the Musky
went incandescent.

Two came in at once then, like balloons in slow motion. I extrapolated
their courses, pulled two grenades and armed them with opposing thumbs,
counted to four, and hurled them together as Collaci had taught me,
aiming for a spot just short of my target. They kissed at that spot and
rebounded, each toward an oncoming Musky. But one grenade went up before
the other, killing its Musky but knocking the other one safely clear. It
whistled past my ear as I threw myself sideways.

Three Muskies. One hot-shot, one grenade.

The one that had been spared sailed around the crane in a wide, graceful
arc and came in low and fast, rising for my face as one of its brothers
attacked from my left. Cursing, I burned the latter and flipped
backwards through a great trail of burning gas from the tank I'd
spoiled. The Musky failed to check in time, shot suddenly skyward and
burst spectacularly. I slammed against a stack of twelve-inch pipe and
heard ribs crack.

One Musky. One grenade.

As I staggered erect, beating at my smoldering turtleneck, Carlson
reemerged from Butler, a curious helmet over his flowing white hair.
Wires trailing from it.

I no longer cared about the remaining Musky. Almost absentmindedly I
tossed my last grenade in its direction to keep it occupied, but I knew
I would have all the time I needed. Imminent death was now a side issue.
I lunged and rolled, came up with the rifle in my hands and aimed for
the O in Carlson's scraggly white beard. Dimly I saw him plugging his
helmet into that curious machine by the door but it didn't matter, it
just didn't matter at all. My finger tightened on the trigger.

And then something smashed me on the side of the neck behind the ear,
and my finger clenched, and the blackness that had been waiting
patiently for oh! so long swarmed in and washed away the pain and the
hate and the weariness and oh God the awful smell . . .

 


  CHAPTER FOUR

". . . and when I came to, Carlson was dead with a slug through the head
and the last Musky was nowhere in smell. So I reset my plugs, found the
campfire behind the hedges and ate his supper, and then left the next
morning. I found a Healer in Jersey. That's all there is, Dad."

My father chewed the pipe he had not smoked in eighteen years and stared
into the fire. Dry poplar and green birch together produced a steady
blaze that warmed the spacious living room and peopled it with leaping
shadows.

"Then it's over," he said at last, and heaved a great sigh.

"Yes, Dad. It's over."

He was silent, his coal-black features impassive, for a long time.
Firelight danced among the valleys and crevices of his patriarch's face,
and across the sharp scar on his left cheek (so like the one I now
bore). His eyes glittered like rainy midnight. I wondered what he was
thinking, after all these years and all that he had seen.

"Isham," he said at last, "you have done well."

"Have I, Dad "

"Eh "

"I just can't seem to get it straight in my mind. I guess I expected
tangling with Carlson to be a kind of solution, to some things that have
been bugging me all my life. Somehow I expected pulling that trigger to
bring me peace. Instead I'm more confused than ever. Surely you can
smell my unease, Dad  Or are your plugs still in again " Dad used the
best plugs in Fresh Start, entirely internal, and he perpetually forgot
to remove them after work. Even those who loved him agreed he was the
picture of the absentminded professor.

"No," he said hesitantly. "I can smell that you are uneasy, but I can't
smellwhy . You must tell me, Isham."

"It's not easy to explain, Dad. I can't seem to find the words. Look, I
wrote out a kind of journal of events in Jersey, while the Healer was
working on me, and afterwards while I rested up. It's the same story I
just told you, but somehow on paper I think it conveys more of what's
bothering me. Will you read it "

He nodded. "If you wish."

I gave my father all the preceding manuscript, right up to the moment I
pulled the trigger and blacked out, and brought him his glasses. He read
it slowly and carefully, pausing now and again to gaze distantly into
the flames. While he read, I unobstrusively fed the fire and immersed
myself in the familiar smells of woodsmoke and ink and chemicals and the
pines outside, all the thousand indefinable scents that tried to tell me
I was home.

When Dad was done reading, he closed his eyes and nodded slowly for a
time. Then he turned to me and regarded me with troubled eyes. "You've
left out the ending," he said.

"Because I'm not sure how I feel about it."

He steepled his fingers. "What is it that troubles you, Isham "

"Dad," I said earnestly, "Carlson is the first man I ever killed. That's
. . . not a small thing. As it happens, I didn't actually see my bullet
blow off the back of his skull, and sometimes it's hard to believe in my
gut that I really did it I know it seemed unreal when I saw him
afterward. But in fact I have killed a man. And as you just read, that
may be necessary sometimes, but I'm not sure it's right. Iknow all
that Carlson did, to us Stones and to the world, I know the guilt he
bore. But I must ask you: Dad, was Iright to kill him  Did he deserve
to die "

He came to me than and gripped my shoulder, and we stood like black iron
statues before the raving fire. He locked eyes with me. "Perhaps you
should ask your mother, Isham. Or your brother Israfel. Perhaps you
should have asked the people whose remains you stepped over to kill
Carlson. I do not know what is `right' and `wrong'; they are slippery
terms to define. I only know what is. And revenge, as Collaci told
you,is a uniquely human attribute.

"Superstitious Agro guerillas used to raid us from time to time, and
because we were reluctant to fire on them they got away with it. Then
one day they captured Collaci's wife, not knowing she was diabetic. By
the time he caught up with them she was dead for lack of insulin. Within
two days, every guerilla in that raiding party had died of a broken
neck. Fresh Start has not been raided in all the years since. Ask
Collaci about vengeance."

"But Jordan's Agros hate us more than ever."

"But they buy our ax heads and wheels, our neosulfa and our cloth, just
like their more sensible neighbors, and they leave us alone. Carlson's
death will be an eternal warning to any who would impose their values on
the world at large, and an eternal comfort to those who were robbed by
him of the best of their lives of their homes and their loved ones.

"Isham, you . . . did . . .right . Don't ever think differently, son.
You did right, and I am deeply proud of you. Your mother and Israfel are
resting easier now, and millions more too. I know that I will sleep
easier tonight than I have in eighteen years."

That's right, Dad, you will.I relaxed. "All right, Dad. I guess you're
right. I just wanted to hear someone tell me besides myself. I wanted
you to tell me." He smiled and nodded and sat down again, and I left him
there, an old man lost in his thoughts.

I went to the bathroom and closed the door behind me, glad that restored
plumbing had been one of Fresh Start's first priorities to be realized.
I spent a few minutes assembling some items I had brought back from New
York City and removing the back of the septic tank behind the toilet
bowl. Then I flushed the toilet.

Reaching into the tank, I grabbed the gravity ball and flexed it
horizontally so that the tank would not refill with water. Holding it in
place awkwardly, I made a long arm and picked up the large bottle of
chlorine bleach I had fetched from the city. As an irreplaceable relic
of Civilization it was priceless and utterly useless to modern man. I
slipped my plugs into place and filled the tank with bleach, replacing
the porcelain cover silently but leaving it slightly ajar. I bent again
and grabbed a large canister also a valuable but useless antique of
bathroom bowl cleaner. It was labeled "Vanish," and I hoped the label
was prophetic. I poured the entire canister into the bowl.

Hang the expense,I thought, and giggled insanely.

Then I put the cover down on the seat, hid the bleach and bowl cleaner
and left, whistling softly through my teeth.

I felt good, better than I had since I left New York.

I walked through inky dark to the lake, and I sat among the pines by the
shore, flinging stones at the water, trying to make them skip. I
couldn't seem to get it right. I was used to the balancing effect of a
left arm. I rubbed my stump ruefully and lay back and just thought for
awhile. I had lied to my father it was not over. But it would be soon.

Right or wrong,I thought, removing my plugs and lighting a joint,it
sure can be necessary.  

Moonlight shattered on the branches overhead and lay in shards on the
ground. I breathed deep of the cool darkness, tasted pot and woods and
distant animals and the good crisp scents of a balanced ecology, heard
the faraway hum of wind generators storing power for the work yet to be
done. And I thought of a man gone mad with a dream of a better, simpler
world; a man who, Heaven help him, meant well.

Behind me in the far distance came the sound of a flushing toilet,
followed by a hideous gargling noise, and suddenly I laughed with real
amusement, choking on smoke. The sound of justice:whoosh-
splash-gllgh!It was the grandest joke in the universe; I laughed until
I couldn't cry any more.

Then, taking my time, I recovered the hidden pack and supplies I cached
on my way home. As I strapped up, I thought of the tape recording I had
left behind on the Sony in the living room, and wondered briefly what
Collaci and the Council would think of it. But I didn't really care
much. For the first time in eighteen years, I was at peace. The Hand of
Man had retired.

I set out for New York City.

 


  CHAPTER FIVE


      Transcript of a Tape Recording Made by Isham Stone (Fresh Start
      Judicial Archives)

I might as well address this tape to you, Collaci I'll bet my Musky-gun
that you're the first one to notice and play it. I hope you'll listen to
it as well, but that might be too much to ask, the first time around.
Just keep playing it.

The way I picture it, by the time this is found the Council will have
decided that I murdered Dad both because I've disappeared, and because
the murder weaponshad to come from a city. You don't believe it,
though, and so you've been looking around for clues to the real identity
of the killer. That's how you ran across this tape, threaded and ready
to go. Good old efficient Collaci.

Well, I'm sorry to disappoint you, Teach', but you're wrong. I did set
the trap that killed Dad, or anyway I will after I've finished making
this recording. What's that called  Patricide  That sounds right, like
herbicide or insecticide.

But it's gonna take a lot of talking before I've explained why I have to
kill my father, and you'll have to hear it two or three times and think
about it awhile before you'll be ready to accept and believe. I know:
it's taken me awhile. So maybe we'd best get to it. Whip out one of your
toothpicks, sit down, and try to listen.

It goes back a couple of months, to when I was in the city. By now
you've no doubt found my journal, with its account of my day in New
York, and you've probably noticed the missing ending. Well, here it is . . .

I drifted in the darkness for a thousand years, helpless as a Musky in a
hurricane, caroming off the inside of my skull. Memories swept by like
drifting blimps, and I clutched at them as I sailed past, but the ones
tangible enough to grasp burned my fingers. Vaguely, I sensed distant
daylight on either side, decided those must be my ears and tried to
steer for the right one, which seemed a bit closer. I singed my arm
banking off an adolescent trauma, but it did the trick I sailed out into
daylight and landed on my face with a hell of a crash. I thought about
getting up, but I couldn't remember whether I'd brought my legs with me,
and they weren't talking. My arm hurt even more than my face, and
something stank.

"Help " I suggested faintly, and a pair of hands got me by the armpits.
I rose in the air and closed my eyes against a sudden wave of vertigo.
When it passed, I decided I was on my back in the bed I had just
contrived to fall out of. High in my chest, a dull but insistent pain
advised me to breathe shallowly.

I'll be damned,I thought weakly.Collaci must have come along to back
me up without telling me. Canny old sonofabitch, I should have thought
to pick him up some toothpicks.  

"Hey, Teach'." I croaked, and opened my eyes.

Wendell Morgan Carlson leaned over me, concern in his gaze.

Curiously enough, I didn't try to reach up and crush his larynx. I
closed my eyes, relaxed all over, counted to ten very slowly, shook my
head to clear it and opened my eyes again. Carlson was still there.

ThenI tried to reach up and crush his larynx. I failed, of course, not
so much because I was too weak toreach his larynx as because only one
arm even acknowledged the command. My brain said that my left arm was
straining upwards for Carlson's throat, and complaining like hell about
it too, but I didn't see the arm anywhere. I looked down and saw the
neatly bandaged stump and lifted it up absently to see if my arm was
underneath it and it wasn't. It dawned on me then that the stump was all
the left arm I was ever going to find, and whacko: I was back inside my
skull, safe in the friendly dark, ricocheting off smoldering
recollections again.

The second time I woke up was completely different. One minute I was
wrestling with a phantom, and then a switch was thrown and I was
lucid.Play for time was my first thought,the tactical situation
sucks. I opened my eyes.

Carlson was nowhere in sight. Or smell but then my plugs were back in place.

I looked around the room. It was a room. Four walls, ceiling, floor, the
bed I was in and assorted ugly furniture. Not a weapon in sight, nor
anything I could make one from. A look out the window in the opposite
wall confirmed my guess that I was in Butler Hall, apparently on the
ground floor, not far from the main entrance. The great curved dome of
Low "Library" was nearly centered in the window frame, its great stone
steps partly obscured by overgrown shrubbery in front of Butler. The
shadows said it was morning, getting on toward noon. I closed my eyes,
firmly.

Next I took stock of myself. My plugs were back in place. My head
throbbed a good deal, but it was easily drowned out by the ache in my
chest. Unquestionably some ribs had broken, and it felt as through the
ends were mismatched. But as near as I could tell the lung was intact it
didn't hurt more when I inhaled. Not much more, anyway. My legs both
moved when I asked them to, with a minimum of backtalk, and the ankles
appeared sound. No need to open my eyes again, was there  . . .

I stopped the inventory for a moment. In the back of my skull a clawed
lizard yammered for release, and I devoted a few minutes to reinforcing
the walls of its prison. When I could no longer hear the shrieking, I
switched on my eyes again and quite dispassionately considered the stump
on my left arm.

It looked like a good, clean job. The placement of the cut said it was a
surgical procedure rather than the vengeful hostility I'd thought of
first it seemed as though the gangrene had been beaten.Oh fine, I
thought,a benevolent madman I have to kill. Then I was ashamed. My
mother had been benevolent, as I remembered her; and Israfel never got
much chance to be anything. All men knew Carlson's intentions had been
good. I could kill him with one hand.

I wondered where he was.

A fly buzzed mournfully around the room. Hedges rustled outside the
window, and somewhere birds sang, breathless trills that hung sparkling
on the morning air. It was a beautiful day, just warm enough to be
comfortable, no clouds evident, just enough breeze and the best part of
the day yet to come. It made me want to do down by the stream and poke
frogs with a stick, or go pick strawberries for Mr. Fletcher,
red-stained hands and a bellyful of sweet and the trots next morning. It
was a great day for an assassination.

I thought about it, considered the possibilities. Carlson was . . .
somewhere. I was weaker than a Musky in a pressure-cooker and my most
basic armament was down by twenty-five percent. I was on unfamiliar
territory, and the only objects in the room meaty enough to constitute
weaponry were too heavy for me to lift. Break the windowpane and acquire
a knife  How would I hold it  My sneakers were in sight across the room,
under a chair holding the rest of my clothes, and I wondered if I could
hide behind the door until Carlson entered, then strangle him with the
laces.

I brought up short. How was I going to strangle Carlson with one hand 

Things swam then for a bit, as I got the first of an endless series of
flashes of just how drastically my life was altered now by the loss of
my arm.You'll never use a chainsaw again, or a shovel, or a catcher's
mitt, or . . .  

I buried the lizard again and forced myself to concentrate. Perhaps I
could fashion a noose from my sneaker laces. With one hand Could I 
Maybe if I fastened one end of the lace to something, then looped the
other end around his neck and pulled  I needn't be strong, it could be
arranged so that my weight did the killing. . . .

Just in that one little instant I think I decided not to die, decided to
keep on living with one arm, and the question never really arose in my
mind again. I was too busy to despair, and by the time I could afford
to much later the urge was gone.

All of my tentative plans, therapeutic as they were, hinged on one
important question: could I stand up  It seemed essential to find out.

Until then I had moved only my eyes now I tried sitting up. It was no
harder than juggling bulldozers, and I managed to cut the scream down to
an explosive, "Uh-huh!" My ribs felt like glass broken glass ripping
through the muscle sheathing and pleural tissue. Sweat broke out on my
forehead and I fought down dizziness and nausea, savagely commanding my
body to obey me like a desperate rider digging spurs into a dying horse.
I locked my right arm behind me and leaned on it, swaying but upright,
and waited for the room to stop spinning. I spent the time counting to
one thousand by eighths. Finally it stopped, leaving me with the feeling
that a stiff breeze could start it spinning again.

All right then.Let's get this show on the road, Stone. I swung a leg
over the side of the bed, discovered with relief that my foot reached
the floor. That would make it easier to balance upright on the edge of
the bed before attempting to stand. Before I could lose my nerve I swung
the other leg over, pushed off with my arm, and was sitting upright. The
floor was an incredible distance below had I really fallen that far and
lived  Perhaps I should just wait for Carlson to return, get him to come
close and sink my teeth into his jugular.

I stood up.

A staggering crescendo in the symphony of pain, ribs still carrying the
melody. I locked my knees and tottered, moaning piteously like a kitten
trapped on a cornice. It was the closest I could come to stealthy
silence, and all things considered it was pretty damn close. My right
shoulder was discernibly heavier than the left one, and it played hob
with my balance. The floor, which had been steadily receding, was now so
far away I stopped worrying about it surely there would be time for the
chute to open.

Well, then, why not try a step or two 

My left leg was as light as a helium balloon once peeled off the floor
it tried to head for the ceiling, and it took an enormous effort to
force it down again. The right leg fared no better. Then the room
started spinning again, just as I'd feared, and it was suddenly
impossible to keep either leg beneath my body, which began losing
altitude rapidly. The chute didn't open. There was a jarring crash, and
a ghastlybounce . Many pretty lights appeared, and one of the screams
fenced in behind closed teeth managed to break loose. The pretty lights
gave way to flaking ceiling, and the ceiling gave way to blackness. I
remembered a line from an old song Doctor Mike used to sing, something
about ". . . roadmaps in a well-cracked ceiling . . ." and wished I'd
had time to read the map. . . .

I came out of it almost at once, I think. Itfelt as though the room
was still spinning, but I was now spinning with it at the same velocity.
By great good fortune I had toppled backward, across the bed. I took a
tentative breath, and it still felt like my lung was intact. I was
drenched with sweat, and I seemed to be lying on someone's rock collection.

Okay,I decided,if you're too weak to kill Carlson now, pretend you're
even weaker. Get back under the sheets and play dead, until your
position improves. Isham Machiavelli, that's me. You'd've been proud of
me, Teach'.

The rock collection turned out to be wrinkled sheets. Getting turned
around and back to where I'd started was easier than reeling a whale
into a rowboat, and I had enough strength to arrange the sheets
plausibly before all my muscles turned into peanut butter. Then I just
lay there breathing as shallowly as I could manage, wondering why my
left . . . why my stump didn't seem to hurt enough. I hated to look a
gift horse in the mouth; the psychological burden was quite heavy
enough, thanks. But it made me uneasy.

I began composing a square-dance tune in time to the throbbing of my
ribs. The room reeled to it, slightly out of synch at first but then so
rhythmically that it actually seemed to stumble when the snare-drummer
out in the hall muffed a paradiddle. The music stopped, but the drummer
staggered on off-rhythm, faint at first but getting louder.

It had to be Carlson.

He was making a hell of a racket. Feverishly, I envisioned him dragging
a bazooka into the room and lining it up on me. Crazy. A fly-swatter
would have more than sufficed. But what the hellwas he carrying then 

The answer came through the doorway: a large carton filled with things
that clanked and rattled. Close behind it came Wendell Morgan Carlson
himself, and it was as well that the square-dance music had stopped the
acceleration of my pulse would have made the tune undanceable. My
nostrils tried to flare around the plugs, and the hair on the back of my
neck might have bristled in atavistic reflex if there hadn't been a
thousand pounds of head lying on it.

The Enemy! 

He had no weapons visible. He looked much older than his picture on the
Carlson Poster but the craggy brow, thin pinched nose and high cheeks
were unmistakable, even if the lantern jaw was obscured by an inordinate
amount of white beard. He was a bit taller than I had pictured him, with
more hair and narrower shoulders. I hadn't expected the potbelly. He
wore baggy jeans and a plaid flannel shirt, both ineptly patched here
and there, and a pair of black sandals.

His face held more intelligence than I like in an antagonist he would
not be easy to fool. Wendellwho  Never heard of him. Just got back from
Pellucidar myself, and I was wondering if you could tell me where all
the people went  Sorry I took a shot at you, and oh, yeah, thanks for
cutting off my arm; you're a brick.  

He put the carton down on an ancient brown desk, crushing a faded
photograph of someone's children, turned at once to meet my gaze and
said an incredible thing.

"I'm sorry I woke you."

I don't know what I'd expected. But in the few fevered moments I'd had
to prepare myself for this moment, my first exchange of words with
Wendell Morgan Carlson, I had never imagined such an opening gambit. I
had no riposte prepared.

"You're welcome," I croaked insanely, and tried to smile. Whatever it
was I actually did seemed to upset him; his face took on that look of
concern I had glimpsed once before when  Yesterday How long had I been
here   

"I'm glad you are awake," he went on obligingly. "You've been
unconscious for nearly a week." No wonder I felt constructed of inferior
materials. I decided I'd be a pretty tough mothafucka. It was nice to
know I wasn't copping out.

"What's in the box " I asked, with a little less fuzz tone.

"Box " He looked down. "Oh yes, I thought . . . you see, it's
intravenous feeding equipment. I studied the literature, and I . . ." He
trailed off. His voice was a reedy but pleasant alto, with rustling
brass edges. He appeared unfamiliar with its use.

"You were going to . . ." An ice cube formed in my bowels. Needle into
sleeping arm, suck my life from a tube; have a hit of old Isham.Steady
boy, steady.  

"Perhaps it might still be a good idea," he mused. "All I have to offer
you at the moment is bread and milk. Not real milk, of course, but then
you could have honey with the bread. I suppose that's as good as glucose."

"Fine with me, Doctor," I said hastily. "I have a thing about needles."
And other sharp instruments. "But where do you get your honey "

He frowned quizzically. "How did you know I have a Ph.D. "

Think quick."I didn't. I assumed you were a Healer. It was you who
amputated my arm " I kept my voice even.

His frown deepened, a striking expression on that craggy face. "Young
man," he said reluctantly, "I have no formal medical training of any
sort. Perhaps your arm could have stayed on but it seemed to me . . ."
He was, to my astonishment, mortally embarrassed.

"Doctor, it needed extensive cutting the last time I saw it, and I'm
sure it got worse while I was under. Don't . . . worry about it. I'm
sure you did the best you could." If he was inclined to forget my
attempt to blow his head off, who wasI to hold a grudge  Let bygones
be bygones I didn't need a new reason to kill him.

"I read all I could find on field amputation," he went on, still
apologetic, "but of course I'd never done one before." On anything
smaller than a race. I assured him that it looked to me like a textbook
job. It was inexpressibly weird to have this man seek my pardon for
saving my life when I planned to take his at the earliest possible
opportunity. It upset me, made me irritable. My wounds provided a
convenient distraction, and I moved enough to justify a moan.

Carlson was instantly solicitous. From his cardboard carton he produced
a paper package which, torn open, revealed a plastic syringe. Taking a
stoppered jar from the carton, he drew off a small amount of clear fluid.

"What's that " I said, trying to keep the suspicion from my voice.

"Demerol."

I shook my head. "No, thanks, Doc. I told you I don't like needles."

He nodded, put down the spike and took another object from the carton.
"Here's oral demerol, then. I'll leave it where you can reach it." He
put it on a bedside table. I picked up the jar, gave it a quick glance.
It said it was demerol. I could not break the seal around the cap with
one hand Carlson had to open it for me.Thank you, my enemy. Weird,
weird, weird! I palmed a pill, pretending to swallow it. He looked
satisfied.

"Thanks, Doc."

"Please don't call me `doc'," he asked. "My name is Wendell Carlson."

If he was expecting a reaction, he was disappointed. "Sure thing,
Wendell. I'm Tony Latimer. Pleased to meet you." It was the first name
that entered my head.

There was a lull in the conversation. We studied each other with the
frank curiosity of men who have not known human company for a while. At
last he looked embarrassed again and tore his gaze from mine. "I'd
better see about that food. You must be terribly hungry."

I thought about it. It seemed to me that I could put away a
quarter-horse. Raw. With my fingers. "I could eat."

Carlson left the room, looking at his sandals.

I thought of loading the hypo with an overdose and ambushing him when he
returned, but it was just a thought. That hypo was mighty far away. I
returned my attention to the jar on the table. It still said it was
demerol and ithad been sealed, with white plastic. But Carlson could
have soaked off and replaced a skull-and-crossbones label I decided to
live with the pain awhile longer.

It seemed like a long time before he returned, but my time-sense was not
too reliable. He fetched a half-loaf of brown bread, a Mason jar of milk
and some thick, crystallized honey. They say that smell is essential to
taste, and I couldn't unplug, but it tasted better than food ever had
before.

"You never told me where you get honey, Wendell."

"I have a small hive down in Central Park. Only a few supers, but
adequate for my needs. Wintering the bees is quite a trick, but I manage."

"I'll bet it is." Small talk in the slaughterhouse. I ate what he gave
me and drank reconstituted milk until I was full. My body still hurt,
but not as much.

We talked for about half an hour, mostly inconsequentialities, and it
seemed that a tension grew up between us, because of the very
inconsequentiality of our words. There were things of which we did not
speak, of which innocent men should have spoken. In my dazed condition I
could concoct no plausible explanation for my presence in New York, nor
for the shot I had fired at him. Somehow he accepted this, but in return
I was not to ask him how he came to be living in New York City. I was
not supposed to have any idea who Wendell Morgan Carlson was. It was an
absurd bargain, a truth-level impossible to maintain, but it suited both
of us. I couldn't imagine what he thought of my own conversational
omissions, but I was convinced that his silence was an admission of
guilt, and my resolve was firmed. He left me at last, advising me to
sleep if I could and promising to return the next day.

I didn't sleep. Not at first. I lay there looking at the demerol bottle
for a hundred years, explaining to myself how unlikely it was that the
bottle wasn't genuine. I could not help it hatred and distrust of
Carlson were ingrained in me.

But enough pain will break through the strongest conditioning. About
sundown I ate the pill I'd palmed, and in a very short time I was
unconscious.

The next few days passed slowly.

 


  CHAPTER SIX


      Stone Tape Transcript, Side Two

The days passed slowly, but not so slowly as the pain. Lucidity returned
slowly, but no faster than physical strength.

You've got to understand how it was, Teach'.

The demerol helped but not by killing the pain. What it did was keep me
so stoned that I often forgot the pain was there. In a warm, creative
glow I would devise a splendidly subtle and poetic means of Killing
Carlson then half an hour later the same plan would seem hopelessly
crack-brained. An imperfection of the glass in the window across the
room, warping the clean, proud line of Low Dome, held me fascinated for
hours yet I could not seem to concentrate for five minutes on practical
matters.

Carlson came and went, asking few questions and answering fewer, and in
my stupor I tried to fire my hate to the killing point, and, Collaci, my
instructor and mentor and (I hope) friend, I failed.

You must understand me I spent hours trying to focus on the hatred my
father had passed on to me, to live up to the geas that fate had laid on
me, to do my duty. But it was damned hard work. Carlson was an absurd
combination: so absentminded as to remind me of Dad and as thoughtful,
in his way, as you. He would forget his coat when he left at night but
be back on time with a hot breakfast, shivering and failing to notice.
He would forget my name, but never my chamberpot. He would search,
blinking, in all directions for the coffee cup that sat perched on his
lap, but he never failed to put mine where I could reach it without
strain on my ribs. I discovered quite by accident that I slept in the
only bed Carlson had ever hauled into Butler, that he himself dossed on
a makeshift bed out in the hall, so as to be near if I cried out in the
night.

He offered no clue to his motivations, no insight into what had kept him
entombed in New York City. He spoke of his life of exile as a simple
fact, requiring no explanation. It seemed more and more obvious that his
silence was an admission of guilt: that he could not explain his
survival and continued presence in this smelly mausoleum without
admitting his crime. I tried how I tried to hate him.

But it was damnably difficult. He supplied my needs before I could voice
them, wants before I could form them. He sensed when I craved company
and when to leave me be, when I needed to talk and when I needed to be
talked to. He suffered my irritability and occasional rages in a way
that somehow allowed me to keep my self-respect.

He was gone for long periods of time during the day and night, and never
spoke of his activities. I never pressed him for information; as a
recuperating assassin it behooved me to display no undue curiosity. I
could not risk arousing his suspicions.

We never, for instance, chanced to speak of my weapons or their whereabouts.

And so the subconscious tension of our first conversation stayed with
us, born of the things of which we did not speak. It was obvious to both
of us and yet it was a curious kind of kinship, too: both of us lived
with something we could not share, and recognized the condition in the
other. Even as I planned his death I felt a kind of empathy between
Wendell Morgan Carlson and myself. It bothered the hell out of me. If
Carlson was what Iknew he was, what his guilty silence only proved him
to be, then his death was necessary and just for my father had taught me
that debts are always paid. But I could not help but like the
absentminded old man.

Yet that tension was there. We spoke only of neutral things: where he
got gasoline to feed the generator that powered wallsockets in the
ground-floor rooms (we did not discuss what he would store it in now
that I'd ruined his 200-gallon tank). How far he had to walk these days
to find scavengeable flour, beans, and grains. The trouble he had
encountered in maintaining the University's hydroponics cultures by
himself. What he did with sewage and compost. The probability of
tomatoes growing another year in the miserable sandy soil of Central
Park. What a turkey he'd been to not think of using the alcohol in
Organic Chem labs for fuel. Never did we talk of why he undertook all
the complex difficulty of living in New York, nor why I had sought him
here. He diverted the patient with light conversation, and the patient
allowed him to do so.

I had the hate part all ready to go, but I couldn't superimpose my
lifetime picture of Carlson over this fuzzy, pleasant old academic and
make it fit. And so the hate boiled in my skull and made convalescence
an aimless, confused time. It got much worse when Carlson, explaining
that few things on earth are more addictive than oral demerol, cut me
off cold turkey in my second week. Less potent analgesics, Talwin,
aspirin, all had decayed quickly, and if I sent Carlson rummaging
through the rucksack I had off campus for the remaining weed, he would
in all likelihood come across the annotated map of New York given my by
Collaci, and the mimeo'd Carlson Poster. Besides, my ribs hurt too much
to smoke.

One night I woke in a sweat-soaked agony to find the room at a crazy
angle, the candle flame slanting out of the dark like a questing tongue.
I had half-fallen out of bed, and my right arm kept me from falling the
rest of the way, but I could not get back up without another arm. I
didn't seem to have one. Ribs began to throb as I considered the
dilemma, and I cried out in pain.

From out in the hallway came a honking snore that broke off in a grunted
"Whazzat  Wha " and then a series of gasps as Carlson dutifully rolled
from his bed to assist me. There came a crash, then a greater one
attended by a splash, then a really tremendous crash that echoed and
reechoed. Carlson lurched into view, a potbellied old man in yellow
pajamas, eyes three-quarters closed and unfocused, one foot trapped in a
galvanized wastebasket, gallantly coming to my rescue. He hit the door
frame a glancing blow with his shoulder, overbalanced and went down on
his face. I believe he came fully awake a second after he hit the floor;
his eyes opened wide and he saw me staring at him in dazed disbelief
from a few inches away. And for one timeless moment the absurdity of our
respective positions hit us, and we broke up, simultaneous whoops of
laughter at ourselves that cut off at once, and a second later he was
helping me back into bed with strong, gentle hands, and I was trying not
to groan aloud.

Dammit, I liked him.

Then one day while he was away I rose from the bed all by myself, quite
gratified to find that I could, and hobbled like an old, old, man
composed of glass to the window that looked out on the entrance area of
Butler and the hedge-hidden quadrangle beyond. It was a chill, slightly
off-white day, but to me even the meager colors of shrub and tree seemed
unaccountably vivid. From the overfamiliar closeness of the sickroom,
the decaying campus had a magnificent depth. Everything was sofar away
. It was a little overwhelming. Moving closer to the window, I looked to
the right.

Carlson stood before the front doors, staring up at the sky over the
quadrangle with his back to me. On his head was the same curious helmet
I had seen once before, days ago, framed in the crosshairs of my rifle.
Its tangle of wires was plugged into the large console I recalled. I
wondered again what it could be, and then I saw something that made me
freeze, made me forget the pain and the dizziness and stare with full
attention.

Carlson was staring down the row between two greatly overgrown hedges
that ran parallel to each other and perpendicular to Butler, facing
toward Low's mighty cascade of steps. But he stared as a man watching
somethingnear him, and its position followed that of the wind-tossed
upper reaches of the hedges.

Intuitively I knew that he was using the strange machine to communicate
with a Musky, and all the hatred and rage for which I had found no
outlet boiled over, contorting my face with fury.

* * *

It seemed an enormous effort not to cry out some primal challenge; I
believe I bared my teeth.You bastard, I thought savagely,you set us
up for them, made them our enemies, and now you're hand in glove with
them. I was stupefied by such incredible treachery, could not make any
sense of it, did not care. As I watched from behind and to the left I
saw his lips move silently, but I did not care what they said, what kind
of deal Carlson had worked out with the murderous gas-clouds. He had
one. He dealt with the creatures that had killed my mother, that he had
virtually created. He would soon die.

I shuffled with infinite care back to bed, and planned.

* * *

I was ready to kill him within a week. My ribs were mostly healed now I
came to realize that my body's repair process had been waiting only for
me to decide to heal, to leave the safe haven of convalescence. My
strength returned to me and soon I could walk easily, and even dress
myself with care, letting the left sleeve dangle. Most of the pain was
gone from the stump, leaving only the many annoying tactile phenomena of
severed nerves, the classic "phantom arm" and the flood of sweat which
seemed to pour from my left armpit but could not be found on my side.
Thanks to Carlson's tendency toward sound sleep, I was familiar with the
layout of the main floor and had recovered the weapons he was too
absent-minded to destroy. He had "hidden" them in a broom closet.

I wanted to take him in a time and place where his Musky pals couldn't
help him; it seemed to me certain that the ones I had destroyed were
bodyguards. A blustery cold night obliged by occurring almost
immediately, breezes too choppy to be effectively used by a windrider.

The kind of night which, in my childhood, we chose for a picnic or a
hayride.

We ate together in my room, a bean and lentil dish with tamari and fresh
bread, and as he was finishing his last sip of tea I brought the rifle
out from under the blanket and drew a bead on his face.

"End of the line, Wendell."

* * *

He sat absolutely still, cup still raised to his lips, gazing gravely
over it at me, for a long moment. Then he put the cup down very slowly,
and sighed. "I didn't think you'd do it so soon. You're not well enough,
you know."

I grinned. "You were expecting this, huh "

"Ever since you discovered your weapons the night before last, Tony."

My grin faded. "And you let me live  Wendell, have you a death wish "

"I cannot kill," he said sadly, and I roared with sudden laughter.

"Maybe not any more, Wendell. Certainly not in another few minutes."But
you have killed before, killed more than anyone in history. Hell,
Hitler, Atilla, they're punks beside you!  

He grimaced. "So you know who I am."

"The whole world knows. What's left of it."

Pain filled his eyes, and he nodded. "The last few times I tried to
leave this city, to find others to help me in my work, they shot at me.
Two years ago I found a man down in the Bowery who had been attacked by
a dog pack. He said he had come to kill me, for the price on my head,
and he died in my arms, cursing me, as I brought him here. The price he
named was high, and I knew there would be others."

"And you nursed me back to health  You must know that you deserve to
die." I sneered. "Musky-lover."

"You know even that, then "

"I saw you talking with them, with that crazy machine of yours. The ones
who attacked me were your bodyguards, weren't they "

"The windriders came to me almost twenty years ago," he said softly,
eyes far away. "They did not harm me. Since then I have slowly learned
to speak with them, after a fashion, using the undermind. We might yet
have understood one another."

The gun was becoming heavy on my single arm, difficult to aim properly.
I rested the barrel on my knee, and shifted my grip slightly. My hands
were sweaty.

"Well " he said gruffly. "Why haven't you killed me already "

A good question. I swept it aside irritably. "Why did you do it " I barked.

"Why did I create the Hyprosmic Virus " His weathered face saddened even
more, and he tugged at his beard, his voice anguished. "Because I was a
damned fool, I suppose. Because it was a pretty problem in biochemistry.
Because no one else could have done it, and because I wasn't certain
that I could. I never suspected when I began that it would be used as it
was."

"Its release was a spur-of-the-moment decision, is that it " I snarled,
tightening my grip on the trigger.

"I suppose so," he said quietly. "Only Jacob could tell us for sure."

"Who " 

"Jacob Stone," he said, startled by my violence. "My assistant. I
thought you said you . . ."

"So you knew who I was all the time," I growled.

He blinked at me, plainly astounded. Then understanding flooded his
craggy features. "Of course," he murmured. "Of course. You're young
Isham I should have recognized you. I smelled your hate, of course, but
I never . . ."

"Youwhat  "

"Smelled the scent of hate upon you," he repeated, puzzled. "Not much of
a trick you've been reeking with it."

How could he impossible, sweep it aside.

"And now I imagine you'll want to discharge that hate and avenge your
father's death. That was his own doing, but no matter: it was I who made
it possible. Go ahead, pull the trigger." He closed his eyes.

"My father is not dead," I said, drowning now in confusion.

Carlson opened his eyes at once. "No  I assumed he perished when he
released the Virus."

My ears roared; the rifle was suddenly impossible to aim. I wanted to
cry out, to damn Carlson for a liar, but I knew the fuzzy professor was
no actor and all at once I sprang up out of the bed and burst from the
room, through wrought-iron lobby doors and out of the great empty hall,
out into blackness and howling wind and a great swirling kaleidoscope of
stars that reeled drunkenly overhead. Ribs pulsing, I walked for a
hundred years, clutching my idiot rifle, heedless of danger from Musky
or hungry Doberman, pursued by a thousand howling demons. Dimly I heard
Carlson calling out behind me for a time, but I lost him easily and
continued, seeking oblivion. The city, finding its natural prey for the
first time in two decades, obligingly swallowed me up.

* * *

More than a day later I had my next conscious thought. I became aware
that I had been staring at my socks for at least an hour, trying to
decide what color they were.

My second coherent thought was that my ass hurt.

I looked around: beyond smashed observation windows, the great steel and
stone corpse of New York City was laid out below me like some incredible
three-dimensional jigsaw. I was at the top of the Empire State Building.

I had no memory of the long climb, nor of the flight downtown from
Columbia University, and it was only after I had worked out how tired I
must be that I realized how tired I was. My ribs felt sandblasted, and
the winds that swept the observation tower were very very cold.

I was higher from the earth than I had ever been before in my life,
facing south toward the empty World Trade Center, toward that part of
the Atlantic into which this city had once dumped five hundred cubic
feet of human shit every day; but I saw neither city nor sea. Instead I
saw a frustrated, ambitious black man, obsessed with a scheme for
quick-and-easy world salvation, conning a fuzzy-headed genius whose
eminence he could never hope to attain. I saw that man, terrified by the
ghastly results of his folly, fashioning a story to shift blame from
himself and repeating it until all men believed it and perhaps he
himself as well. I saw at last the true face of that story's villain: a
tormented, guilt-driven old man, exiled for the high crime of
gullibility, befriended only by his race's bitterest enemies, nursing
his assassin back to health. And I saw as though for the first time that
assassin, trained and schooled to complete a cover-up, the embittered
black man's last bucket of whitewash.

My father had loaded me with all the hatred and anger he felt for
himself, aimed me toward a scapegoat and fired me like a cannonball.

But I would ricochet.

I became aware of noise below me, in the interior of the building. I
waited incuriously, not even troubling to lift my rifle from my lap. The
noise became weary footsteps on the floor below me. They shuffled slowly
up the iron stairway nearest me, and paused at the top. I heard hoarse,
wheezing breath, struggling to slow itself, succeeding. I did not turn.

"Hell of a view," I said, squinting at it.

"View of a hell," Carlson wheezed behind me.

"How'd you find me, Wendell "

"I followed your spoor."

I spun, stared at him, "You . . .  "

"Followed your spoor."

I turned around again, and giggled. The giggle became a chuckle, and
then I sat on it. "Still got your adenoids, eh, doc  Sure. Twenty years
in this rotten graveyard and I'll bet you've never owned a set of
noseplugs. Punishment to fit the crime and then some."

He did not reply. His breathing was easier now.

"My father, Wendell, now there's an absentminded man for you," I went on
conversationally. "Always doing some sort of Civilized work, always
forgetting to remove his plugs when he comes home he surely does take a
lot of kidding. Our security chief, Phil Collaci, quietly makes sure Dad
has a Guard with him at all times when he goes outdoors just can't
depend on Dad's sense of smell, Teach' says. Dad always was a terrible
cook, you know  He always puts too much garlic in the soup. Am I boring
you, Wendell  Would you like to hear a lovely death I just dreamed  I am
the last assassin on earth, and I have just created a brand-new death, a
unique one. It convicts as it kills if you die, you deserve to." My
voice was quite shrill now, and a part of me clinically diagnosed
hysteria. Carlson said something I did not hear as I raved of toilet
bowls and brains splashing on a sidewalk and impossible thousands of
chittering gray rats and my eyes went nova and a carillon shattered in
my skull and when the world came back I realized that the exhausted old
man had slapped my head near off my shoulders. He crouched beside me,
holding his hand and wincing.

"Why have no Muskies attacked me, here in the heights " My voice was
soft now, wind-tossed.

"The windriders project and receive emotions. Those who sorrow as you
and I engender respect and fear in them. You are protected now, as I
have been these twenty years. An expensive shield."

I blinked at him and burst into tears.

He held me then in his frail old arms, as my father had never done, and
rocked me while I wept. I wept until I was exhausted, and when I had not
cried for a time he said softly, "You will put away your new death,
unused. You are his son, and you love him."

I shivered then, and he held me closer, and did not see me smile.

* * *

So there you have it, Teach'. Stop thinking of Jacob Stone as the Father
of Fresh Start, and see him as a man and you will not only realize that
his sense of smell was a hoax, but like me will wonder how you were ever
taken in by so transparent a fiction. There are a dozen blameless
explanations for Dad's anosmia none of which would have required pretense.

So look at the method of his dying. The lid of the septic tank will be
found ajar the bathroom will surely smell of chlorine. Ask yourself how
a chemist could possibly walk into such a trap if he had any sense of
smell at all  

Better yet, examine the corpse for adenoids.

When you've put it all together, come look me up. I'll be at Columbia
University, with my good friend Wendell Morgan Carlson. We have a lot of
work to do, and I suspect we'll need the help of you and the Council
before long. We're learning to speak Musky, you see. . . .

If you come at night, I've got a little place of my own set up in the
lobby of the Waldorf Astoria. You can't miss me. But be sure to knock:
I'm Musky-proof these days, but I've still got those subconscious
sentries you gave me.

And I'm scared of the dark.

 


  CHAPTER SEVEN


      Fom the Journal of Isham Stone

Force corps ins heaven yours I go hour four fathers found dead a pond
discon tune enter noon Asian. . . . 

Foreskin and seven beers ago our forefingers foundered upon this
condiment a ruination. . . . 

Four sore and sullen years to go. . . . 

The rosy glow faded, and conscious thought returned. With it came the
world in all its sights and smells and sounds, replacing the glittering
symmetry of hallucination, the rhythmically shifting paisley swirls and
color-splashes seen palpebrally when the mind is in neutral and the eyes
rolled up. I was back in my body, in lotus, on the roof of Butler Hall.

The Musky had fled.

I wondered why. My rifle seemed to be in my right hand; hair prickled on
the back of neck, ancient reflex-attempt to appear an unchewable bite.
With all the tentativeness of a man with third-degree burns reaching for
a hot coffeepot, I flared my nostrils and cast, seeking the source of my
subconscious alarm. Only the sense of self-preservation could reach me
in the undermind.

Through the daily more-bearable stink of the city I isolated the spoor I
sought, and grinned sourly.

What else  Collaci.

Seven others, heavily armed by the amount of cordite and magnesium I
smelled, all save Collaci saturated with fear-stink. In him I detected,
as usual, only the scent of hyperalertness given off by the trained
hunter, the controlled, unreadable spoor of the predator. They say that
Muskies never attack Teach' because he has no emotions for them to
perceive him by.

The party was near to the southwest, coming up Riverside Drive at about
113^th Street. Slowly they came, and warily, and I found their olfactory
auras heartbreakingly familiar. The party was broadcasting a welter of
emotions almost identical with those I had felt on my first stormy walk
up Broadway nearly three months before. They'd have checked the
Waldorf they knew I was here.

A Musky drifted over St. Hilda's and St. Hugh's School onto Riverside,
and the party's spoor did not change they were all heavily plugged. The
Musky started, rose abruptly skyward and caught a westerly; I sent it a
fleeting hello as it shot past me over Lewisohn Hall. It inscribed
ballet figure over the Lowe Dome by way of reply and was gone. I could
not tell its Name.

I put down my rifle, took the homemade stink bomb from my belt and
heaved it as far as I could toward the center of the quad, feeling the
irony of a Stone throwing something from this roof. It smashed on
pavement, and began smoking. It would alert Wendell, wherever he was.

I took a last look at the campus that lay below me in the rich light of
dawn, took my leave of ancient mighty trees and magnificent empty halls.
From my high eyrie I could see a great long way, smell a longer. I had
come here from my own lodging before daybreak, sensing a good morning
for communication with the windriders, but now there was enough light
for me to pick out the stylized letters carved in the granite face of
Low Library:

 

KINGS . COLLEGE . FOUNDED . IN
THE . PROVINCE . OF . NEW . YORK

By Royal Charter In the
Reign of George II

 

Perpetuated As COLUMBIA COLLEGE By
The People of the State of New York When

They Became Free & Independent 

Maintained & Cherished from Generation
to Generation For the Advancement Of The Public Good & The Glory of
Almighty God

 

Such pomp for an institution that hadn't lasted much more than two
hundred years.

I recovered my rifle when my nose told me that Collaci and his party had
turned down 114^th Street and begun an encircling maneuver round Butler.
I did not need to follow that maneuver Collaci being Collaci, he would
make the most logical and effective dispersal of his forces. Two men
would cover the two exits onto 114th Street. Two would watch the windows
facing on Amsterdam Avenue. One would cover the entrance I had used,
between Furnald and Ferris Booth halls. The last two would seal off
either end of College Walk, and Collaci himself would almost certainly
approach Butler alone from the north he knew from information I'd left
behind where my center of operations was. I'd expected an extra man a
utility infielder but I didn't miss him any.

I rose to my feet and made my way downstairs, whistling through my
teeth. Wendell was on his own now, as ready as I had been able to make
him, and I had some talking to do.

As I descended the dusty stairways, past booby traps and deadfalls and
other lethal secrets, I wondered why I felt none of the old symptoms,
the old emotions at the prospect of imminent combat. No adrenaline sang
through my veins, no infusion of deadly purpose, no eagerness for the
kill, no drive to be about it. I rather hoped we could avoid violence
altogether, though the presence of so many made it seem unlikely. Still
juggling a powder keg with a hot branding iron, just like always, but
not so happy about it.

Maybe losing an arm had lost me my guts.

Then again, I kept going. The emotional symbolism of the place and the
presence, the mereidea of Wendell Morgan Carlson made for an explosive
situation, and the opposition was led by the only man on earth Iknew
was a better fighter than me, but I kept going. Passing as I went the
booby traps and deadfalls and other lethal secrets that might or might
not cover my retreat.

I cut in the generator as I reached the ground floor, and the front door
lights were blazing into life as I emerged from the lobby, rifle slung
low, parallel to the ground. It had taken me some time to reach the
ground from the high roof, and the absence of gunfire convinced me that
Wendell had made it to cover successfully. I hoped I could shortly give
the prearranged signal for him to come out of hiding. I hoped I could
shortly do anything, like raise a pulse.

Out the front doors:

Waist- and chest-high grass, a mohawk strip bounded on either side by
cracked concrete sidewalks flanked with overgrown hedges, the whole
enclosed alley ending in steps up to perpendicular College Walk, which
spans the campus east-west from Broadway to Amsterdam.

In the center of the top step, Collaci.

Lean, hollow face, apparently carved by a whittler in a hurry, all
angles and planes. Deepset eyesockets, deep enough to make his brow
appear broader than it was, and the incongruously rounded, thrice-broken
nose from which depended a ferocious moustache. A ringer for a long-dead
actor named Boone. Dressed in black as I had been, black knit cap over
his crewcut. Crossed bandoliers of ammo, four grenades in sight, two
concussion-type and two incendiaries. One handgun visible, a heater
rather than a man-killer. But the M-60 in his arms was definitely a
slug-thrower: those high-velocity shells could chisel Aristotle's name
from the stone facade above my head. Or draw seven circles around Dante.
Or through me.

I smiled cheerily.

"Hey, Teach'!"

"Hello, Isham." His voice was pleasant, reassuring, almost convincing. I
longed for my lost arm.

"What's new " I asked as pleasantly.

"I have one dead."

"I'm sorry." So much for the utility infielder.

He looked down at the M-60, smiled: He let it hang from its long sling
and took a pipe and matches from his pocket. It was the best chance I'd
ever get both of us shooting from the hip. I thought about it.

And kept on thinking. An even chance was not enough with Collaci.

He got the pipe lit, took a deep lungful of smoke and held it. His eyes
met mine. "Hell of a place to get stoned," he called, and sucked back smoke.

"It purely is.''

"Somehow you want to, though." He exhaled.

"I haven't been smoking much lately. Too busy."

"First toke in four days myself."

"Enough small talk, Teach'. It's not like you. To what do I owe the
etcetera "

He took another long hit, looked quizzical.

"You were just passing through the city, huh "

He exhaled easily. "Okay. I've been sent by the Council to bring you
back with me to Fresh Start. Krish and the others want to talk with you,
boy. At great length."

"What about "

"How you clip your nails one-handed, I suppose. That sort of thing."

I nodded. "Just an errand boy, that's you huh, Teach'  You just follow
orders. So tell me about it and maybe I'll buy a piece."

"They say you talk with Muskies. This gives Krish a wish. A wish to talk
with you."

"I'm the Ambassador from New York, Teach'. I want diplomatic immunity."

"Sling it over your shoulder and come along, son. I'd hate like hell to
smash your only arm."

I grinned at him. "What are you offering "

He looked tired. "Let's not, Isham. I'll get you back to Fresh Start
alive, and the Council will decide the rest. It's not for me to be
offering. You know that."

Gunfire came suddenly from the northeast. Collaci and I were carved of
stone. Or maybe cast in iron, like twin grenades. His gaze was hooded,
but then it always was. There were two shots together, then a third, a
long pause and then the last two. My heart turned to ice.So this is
what it's like when a friend dies, said a detached part of my mind, and
I absently filed away an astonishing amount of grief for future perusal.
I smiled at Collaci, and before that smile he winced.

"Quite a feat, Teach'. Your brave hunters offed an old man with no weapons."

"He must have tried to run," Collaci said dispassionately. "The orders
read `alive for questioning' but that wasCarlson. He shouldn't have
spooked my men."

"Yeah," I agreed. "He should have walked over here and offered you a
beer. He'd have made it."

"He would have."

"Yeah," I said again.

Another pair of shots split the stillness. My heart leaped. There was a
sudden fusillade, then silence. The hedges swam like seaweed in the
morning breeze, and shafts of sunlight danced on the grass between
Collaci and me.

"Let's go, Isham," he said finally, flatly.

I made a rude suggestion.

"It's the only arm you've got." The automatic rifle was still slung at
his hip, the pipe still in his left hand.

"There's enough food behind me for a long siege, Teach'," I called, "and
this is a town full of Muskies. Come in after me and see what you've
taught me. Or put up that cannon and leave your weapons at your feet and
come on inside for negotiation."

He shook his head once.

"Standoff, then."

Footsteps came faintly to the left of him, and a man's head appeared
above the chest-high wall of College Walk, jogging toward Collaci. I
could have put a slug through his right ear, but it wasn't my business
to teach Collaci's newest pupils theirs.

"Boss," said the newcomer, "he got away. Subway."

I remembered the IRT station on Broadway and felt a half ton
lighter thank God! Wendell was safe: men who smelled as scared as this
joker would not relish following the devil himself into a subway their
plugs might as well be earrings for all the good they'd do down there.

Collaci frowned, poised on the brink of issuing an order that would not
be obeyed. But he was too smart for that, too smart for me.

"Cover him," he rapped, and was suddenly flat on his stomach. I sensed
rather than saw the oncoming grenade and spun on my heels, diving for
the safety of Butler. But I had strayed too far from first base, and
Collaci had picked me off.

The grenade wentpast me, over my head, and went up in my face as I
hurtled toward the doorway. A giant slapped two boulders together, and I
flipflopped in the air, landing on my back about where I had started.

Incredibly, I was still conscious, but I could not get through to my
body. I saw hedges sway above me, felt flames lap my ankles, and wished
I could whistle. "Born to Lose" was on my mind.

The sun went out gradually, as if someone were slowly turning down its
rheostat.

* * *

Regaining consciousness in Butler Hall can get to be boring, if you do
it often enough. But this was easier than the first time. As my eyes
opened I checked my equipment immediately, and discovered to my
considerable relief that I had everything I had started with. I was
stiff as a February breeze, but my strength was with me and my head was
clear.

Collaci sat beside the bed, perennial toothpick in his mouth, a .45 held
lazily in his bony-knuckled hand. As my eyes opened he lined up the
pistol with them, and being reminded thereby of a subway tunnel I
rejoiced, remembering Wendell's escape.

But grinning hurt my face, so I stopped. Collaci saw this and lowered
the gun. "Anything feel broken inside "

"Just my heart, Teach'." I felt light-headed and vaguely aware that that
was suspect.

Collaci thought so, too. "How many fingers " he asked, and held up his
free hand. I read the number of fingers and gave him the same in reply,
putting my arm into it. He barked a laugh and brought up the gun again.
"You'll do," he said, grinning fiercely.Sonofabitch is pleased, I
thought dizzily. So was I, come to think.

I suddenly realized where we were my old room and how far into the
building. Those booby traps had been pretty good. "How many did you
lose " I croaked.

His grin disappeared. "Two. Counting the one you scragged before you
jumped."

I had 

"Pretty good, Isham. I guess I should be proud of you."

I guessed so, too. Reflexes that operate without even notifying you are
impressive indeed. I told him so.

"You don't look happy," he observed.

"Funny thing happened to me on my way to New York," I said. "I stopped
getting off on killing people."

He nodded slowly. "Bound to happen to me someday. Soon after that
someone'll explode a grenade in my face. You were actually hoping I'd
just go away, weren't you "

"Well . . . I had hopes."

He regarded me for a moment with eyes like chips of obsidian. "You've
changed." A sneer. "Gone pacifist, boy "

"Not exactly. Put that forty-five caliber advantage back in its holster
and I'll break both your arms for you with one of mine. On the other
hand, I'd like you to know that if you close the door behind you on the
way out, a shape charge in the door frame will snap your spine."

A normal man would have started or jumped. Collaci looked intrigued.
"The difference "

"I still understand revenge and self-defense. But I'll stop short of
killing if I possibly can. It's too final. You never have all the facts
and you can't undo it afterward."

"You regret killing Jacob " he asked distantly.

"No."

He seemed somehow happy about that, but I couldn't read the why on his
chiseled face. He stood, spat out a mangled toothpick and twitched the
.45 a millimeter toward the door. "Let's go, Isham."

"Eh "

" `We're blowin' this burg.' Come on, come on. I mean to be out of town
by nightfall."

I started to rise, then bit off a scream and fell back, holding my
middle. "My gut!"

Collaci's eyes narrowed. " `Up' I said."

"Can't . . . . can't make it, Teach'."

Thunder filled the room. Three slugs ripped into the bed, each a foot
closer to my crotch. I flopped weakly and yelped. The forth failed to
smack into my belly.

"I guess maybe youare hurt," Collaci mused.

A short man ducked into the room and tossed a grenade onto the bed.
Collaci looked startled.

I swept it toward the window and sprang, heard glass shatter as I
landed, rolled into a ball, behind a file cabinet.

There was no explosion.

Instead I heard Collaci chuckle. "Thanks, Joe. Well, Isham  Coming  Or
do I start breaking fingers "

I rose cursing to my feet and preceded Collaci down the hall to the
crisp afternoon outdoors vastly chagrined. Good old subconscious
sentries smart as turnips.

Collaci left the door open behind him.

* * *

The day was sunny, and the breeze was from the east, a breeze ridden
only by birds. Five guards sat around a campfire on the broad concrete
sward in a rough circle, eating field rations and managing to look
sullen, scared and salty all at the same time. Three I knew slightly,
and two appeared to be hill-folk from the mountains north of Fresh
Start. These latter, set apart by their tied-back swaths of long hair,
would be the most superstitious, the most spooked. But the three who
came from my own home, the last bastion of scientific thought, gave off
the smell of fear just as strongly. This devil city had taken three of
their comrades.

And I was, in their minds, its most recent avatar.

They rose raggedly as we approached, and I heard growls, saw hands go to
weapons. Of the three Fresh Starters, the one I knew best was ignoring
his sidearm entirely and fondling his knife with dismaying fervor. Joe,
the hill-man who had hurled the phony grenade, looked from me to Collaci
and murmured, "Anybody say we got to bringall of him home, boss " They
didn't seem like friends for the making.

And Collaci barked once and the five came to something very like
attention. He stood before them with fists on his hips and spoke, his
voice like cold steel. "This man is under my care. The Council of Fresh
Start wishes to have speech with him. And that makes his life worth more
than yours at the moment. You'll guard him like hawks, and you'll die
for him if you must. Anybody got a beef "

Nobody had a beef.

We sat out for Fresh Start.

* * *

After we cleared Passaic, New Jersey wasn't too hard to take. It was
good to see countryside again, hills and patches of earth, and even the
highway we sort of followed had poplars growing right up out of it at
fairly regular intervals. Some of them housed birds, who sang.
Long-abandoned automobiles lent a note of color, mostly rust-red, and
were arranged singly and in bunches with the randomness of true natural
beauty. But it was the trees beside the road that held my eyes while I
had toiled in the city, autumn had been spraying latex around the land.
It seemed that no two leaves were the same color.

We marched in silence. I limped for all I was worth, but I didn't seem
to impress anyone very much. No, take that back I impressed the hell out
ofme. As I hobbled through growing darkness I thought often of Alia,
wondered for the thousandth time what name you could give to the thing
that had happened to us on our last night the night before I set out to
track and kill Carlson, months ago. I wondered what she thought of me,
when she did, if she did. I wondered what I thought of her, and knew I
could not postpone finding out much longer. She had come to my home when
I first returned from the city, but I had had Dad send her away. She
never returned, and I left her as my only loose end when I left home
again shortly thereafter. Seems like you just shouldn't ever leave a
world behind with loose ends in it you might not be back.

Here I was doing it again.

Long after sundown Collaci called a halt beneath a half-crumbled
overpass and announced we were camping for the night. Bedrolls were
opened and canteens passed round. Nobody offered me a drink. I collapsed
where I stood, a hair too melodramatically if my tailbone had anything
to say about it, and made my eyes unfocus as I stared at Collaci. He
laughed and threw something at me I had ducked and caught it with my
outflung arm before I realized I'd been suckered again.

It was a four-day-old edition ofGot News, the weekly my father and two
other men had begun nearly two decades ago, when they began
consolidating Fresh Start and feeling the need for a public-relations
arm. Lately it was a photo-offset eight-pager, nearly half that
classified ads.

But page one was still the traditional spot for news. The 36-point bold
head said: "JACOB STONE DEAD." Beneath it a subhead added: "Founding
Father of Fresh Start Found Apparently Slain."

I scanned the copy. Jacob Stone, respected leader and thinker, had been
found dead in his home. Foul play was suspected, but there was no clue
to the identity of his assailant, if any. Further details would be
forthcoming; Security Chief Collaci had promised to issue a statement
soon, etcetera.

For a story that said nothing, it sure said a lot.

No mention of my tape or manuscript, no mention of my name anywhere. Not
even so much as a description of the cause of death. That tight a lid on
a story of this magnitude was almost incredible hell, I guess Dad was
one of the most respected men in the world. A lot of people must be
finding this story baffling. The cover-up could not last: soon the
Council would have to (a) publish the truth, or (b) offer up a fall guy.
It seemed from the events of the past twelve hours or so that my name
was patsy. But why, dammit, wouldn't the truth serve 

Sure it would shock a lot of people. But truth is truth. Or so I believed.

I decided to ask Collaci. I looked up to see him lying about ten yards
from me, cocooned in his sleeping bag, facing the other way. A foodtab
dinner had taken him no longer than reading the paper had taken me. The
odds were even that the old hunter was sound asleep he had that
predator's ability to sleep where and when it was safe, instantly with
the corollary ability to come awake just as instantly. But I was burning
to hear some kind of explanation for the things I had read I decided to
risk approaching the sleeping wolf from behind.

I didn't actually tap-dance to him, but no one could have said I was
tiptoeing. Or pussyfooting. A pussy in platform shoes would have made
less noise approaching Collaci than I did. None of the guards he had
inevitably posted nor the other eating, resting members of the hunting
party even felt it necessary to raise their weapons, growl, or even
glance my way. We were in the country, plugless all, and they knew I
knew they could track me perfectly by scent.

As of course could Collaci, even sound asleep. And my self-esteem rose
some trifling fraction when he troubled to roll over and face me, gun
preternaturally occurring in his fist, before I had covered half the
distance between us.

"Sorry to wake you, Teach'," I said, pitching my voice for his ears only.

"What do you want "

I sat down beside him. "Been reading the paper."

He grunted.

"Mighty interesting lead story. All that's missing is the story."

He grunted again.

"What kind of shit is that, anyway "

He looked at me for a long moment, weighing something, and then his lip
curled. "You're young, boy," he said sourly, "and I've been missing my
two flankers and tailgunner all day, so I'm not inclined to grow you up
politically tonight. Figure it out." And with that he rolled over
savagely and shoved the gun back under his pillow, leaving me with venom
dripping out of my ears, mightily confused. He must have had some reason
for showing me the paper in the first place. I couldn't decide if he
loved me or hated me.

It occurred to me that I neverhad known.

A large man with a face like an underdone turnip tossed me a bedroll,
and as I bent to lay it out and unzip it, added a tin of K-rations with
considerable vim. The tin caught me on the tail, which smarted enough
already, and I spun angrily. He was covering me with a reconditioned
Winchester, grinning. Have you ever seen a turnip grin  I thought
longingly of turnip stew, then gave it up and sat down to eat.

It was a wonderful meal, with the consistency of old stove cement and a
flavor between shoe-leather and toasted mucus. I washed it down with
spit and thought hard. By rights, by all logic, Collaci should have had
a million questions to ask, about my claim that Wendell and I could
communicate with Muskies, if nothing else. But he displayed no
curiosity, no inclination to swap stories or even civilities. I could
imagine him deciding that the story I'd left behind for him was a
fiction. I could picture him deciding to put the arm on me for murdering
Dad. But I couldn't picture him behaving the way he was now it didn't
fit, it didn't jibe. If Collaci had a theory that featured me as a liar,
he'd be testing it, asking probing questions, interrogating me. As far
as I knew he was the last living, Pre-Exodus cop in the world and he was
acting more a dog fetching a stick.

An hour's thinking produced no results. I swore softly for a while in
Swahili and slept.

* * *

And woke, unknown time later, into an uproar of gunfire and shouting men.

Hot-shots split the darkness, and brilliant yellow-green flame blossomed
in the trail of one of them, leaving a momentary ghastly view of men
struggling from sleeping bags, firing as they came. Then blackness fell
again and only the hot-shots and muzzle-flashes were visible.

You don't need to see to fight. My nostrils flared even as I wriggled
one-handed from my sleeping bag, and I counted at least eight Muskies,
at such close quarters it was impossible to pin down the number with
accuracy. Jerked from sleep, surrounded by shouting, shooting men, I
could not easily enter the undermind state, but I tried. If my
complexion had allowed it, I would have paled. The fragmentary interface
I achieved indicated nearly a full Name of windriders within a
three-mile radius!

We were outgunned.

Outgunned  I didn't have amatch. But then, I didn't want or need one.
If I could reach Collaci at once, and make him believe me.

I threw back my head and bellowed. "Heeeeyyyy RUBE!" I don't know what
the hell it means, but it fetched him like it always does. He reared up
out of the gloom, a smoking Musky-gun in his hand, and pulled one from
his belt for me.

I didn't have time to be flattered or grateful. "Teach', hear me good,"
I rapped. "Have your men hold their fire."

He gave a full second to staring at me, then snarled and began to turn
away. I grabbed his shoulder. "Teach', I know what I'm doing! There's a
couple dozen of 'em let me parley or we're dead." 

He started to pull away, and my heart sank. Then he checked, turned
back. "What do I do "

"Thank God! Get your men to hold fire, shut up and stand still."

He opened his mouth, then shut it and turned to the chaotic battle
raging in the night. "Freeze!" he roared.

Discipline pays off all firing ceased, and the shouts were supplanted by
the sound of men falling where they stood, then by silence. "Start an
Om," I hissed, seating myself in hasty half-lotus.

"What the "

"Doit," I whispered savagely.

Collaci sat beside me in classic za-zen posture, filled his gut with
air, and began:

"AAAAAAAAAAAOOOOOOOOOOMMMMM . . ."

For long startled moments he was alone, his men wondering if the Boss
had cracked. Then two voices joined him, one on the same note and one on
the tonic. As the rest came in, I turned inward and entered the undermind.

Four score and seven years ago our forefathers founded upon this
continent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the
proposition that all men are created equal . . . 

Forze corinze heaven years I go arf ore fathers found it a ponthisk on
tin enter noon hay shun . . . 

For scorin' savin' years Agro are forefingers . . . 

 

(astonishment)^28  

 

(greeting) 

 

(interrogative)^28  

(identity) 

(confusion)^28  

(identity) 

(suspicion)^28  

(IDENTITY)

(identity)^28  

 

pause.

 

(interrogative)^28  

(incomprehension) 

(interrogative)^28  

(incomprehension) (receptivity) 

(interrogative)^28 (hate)^28  

(comprehension) (love) 

(astonishment)^28  

 

another pause, and an added depth of communication.

 

(Name )^28  

(Wendell Morgan Carlson) 

(sudden comprehension)^28 (sympathy)^28  

 

Thank God!

 

(requests )^28  

(go in peace) 

(it is done)^28  

(wait) (Name ) 

(it is proper)^28 (Sirocco)^28  

(identity) (farewell) 

(identity)^28 (farewell)^28  

 

. . . con sieve din libber tea end dead a cay to tooth a proper zish in
that Allman are creative sequels . . . 

Fore scorn's heaven years aglow . . . 

The group Om-chant pillowed me gently back to reality like a psychic
parachute, and I was back in my conscious, the consciousness-occupying
word games gone, no longer needed. The night sky no longer smelled musky.

The Sirocco Clan had gone.

As his own nostrils confirmed this, Collaci stopped Om-ing beside me. I
wondered if I should tell him that he had just joined the Carlson Clan.

"Anyone hurt " he called softly. The Om ceased; stillness returned to
the night.

"All here, all whole, major," came a hoarse voice.

"Shift guards and sack out," he ordered and was obeyed. There was no
conversation, and not because the Boss wouldn't have liked it.

He turned to me then, and looked at me in silence through the dark for a
long time. He passed me his pipe and lit it for me. I nearly choked: it
was hash. And as I sucked deep on the token of friendship he began to
talk softly, speaking at first of apparently unrelated things. It was
his way of saying thanks I guess he hated losing men under his command.
I kept my lip buttoned and both ears open, and by dawn I understood why
the Council had decided that I must die.

 


  CHAPTER EIGHT


      Excerpts from The Building of Fresh Start, by Jacob Stone, Ph.D.,
      authorized version: Fresh Start Press, 2001

Although Fresh Start grew slowly and apparently randomly as personnel
and materials became available, its development followed the basic
outline of a master plan conceived within a year of the Exodus. Of
course, I had not the training or experience to visualize specifics of
my dream at that early stage but the basic layout was inherent in the
shape of the landscape and in the nature of the new world Carlson had
made for us all.

Five years prior to the Exodus, a man named Gallipolis had acquired
title, by devious means, to a logged-out area some distance northwest of
New York City. It was an isolated two hundred-acre parcel of an
extremely odd shape. Seen from the air it must have resembled an
enormous pair of green sunglasses: two valleys choking with new growth,
separated physically by a great perpendicular extrusion of the eastern
mountain range, almost to the western slopes, leaving the north and
south valleys joined only by a narrow channel. The perpendicular "nose"
between the valley "lenses" was a tall, rocky ridge, sharply sloped on
both sides, forming a perfect natural division. The land dropped gently
away from the foot of this ridge in either direction, and dirt roads
left by the loggers cut great loops through both valleys. The land was
utterly unsuited for farming, and too many miles from nowhere for
suburban development it was what real estate brokers called "an
investment in the future."

Gallipolis was a mad Greek. Mad Greeks in literature are invariably
swarthy, undereducated, poor, and drunk. Gallipolis was florid, superbly
educated, moderately well off and a teetotaler. He looked upon his
valleys and he smiled a mad smile and decided to hell with the future.
He had a serviceable road cut through the north forest past the lake, to
a lonely stretch of state highway which fed into the nearby Interstate.
He brought bulldozers down this road and had six widely spaced acres
cleared west of the logging road loop in the north valley, and a seventh
acre on the lakeshore for himself. On these sites he built large and
extremely comfortable homes, masterpieces of design which combined an
appearance of "roughing it" with every imaginable modern convenience. He
piped in water from spring-fed streams high on the slopes of the Nose
(as he had come to call the central ridge). He built beach houses along
the lake shore. It was his plan to lease the homes to wealthy men as
weekend or summer homes at an exorbitant fee, and use the proceeds to
develop three similar sites in both valleys. He envisioned an ultimate
two or three dozen homes and an early retirement, but the only two
things he ultimately achieved were to go broke before a single home had
been leased and to drop dead.

A nephew inherited the land and the staggering tax bill. He chanced to
be a student ofmine, and was aware that I was in the market for a
weekend haven from the rigors of the city; he approached me. Although
the place was an absurdly long drive from New York, I went up with him
one Saturday, looked over the house nearest the lake, made him a firm
offer of a quarter of his asking price, and closed the deal on the spot.
It was a beautiful place. My wife and I became quite fond of it and
never missed an opportunity to steal a weekend there. Before long we had
neighbors, but we seldom saw them, save occasionally at the lake. We had
all come there for a bit of solitude, and it was quite a big lake none
of us were socially inclined.

It was for this wooden retreat that my family and I made in the horrible
hours of the Exodus, and only by the grace of God did we make it.
Certainly none of the other tenants did, then or ever, and it must be
assumed that they perished. Sarwar Krishnamurti, a chemist at Columbia
who had been an occasional weekend guest at Stone Manor, remembered the
place in his time of need and showed up almost at once, with his family.
He was followed a few days later by George Dalhousie, a friend of mine
from the Engineering Department to whom I had once given directions to
the place.

We made them as welcome as we could under the circumstances my wife was
in a virtual state of shock from the loss of our eldest son, and none of
us were in much better shape. I know we three men found enormous comfort
in each other's presence, in having other men of science with whom to
share our horror, our astonishment, our guesses and our grim
extrapolations. It kept us sane, kept our minds on practical matters, on
survival; for had we been alone, we might have succumbed, as did so
many, to a numb, traumatized disinterest in living.

Instead, we survived the winter that came, the one that killed so many,
and by spring we had laid our plans.

We made occasional abortive forays into the outside world, gathering
information from wandering survivors. All media save rumor had perished;
even my international-band radio was silent. On these expeditions we
were always careful to conceal the existence and location of our home
base, pretending to be as disorganized and homeless as the aimless
drifters we continually encountered. We came to know every surviving
farmer in the surrounding area, and established friendly relations with
them by working for them in exchange for food. Like all men, we avoided
areas of previous urbanization, for nose plugs were inferior in those
days, and Muskies were omnipresent and terrifying. In fact, rumor
claimed, they tended to cluster in cities and towns.

But that first spring, we conquered our fear and revulsion with great
difficulty and began raiding small towns and industrial parks with a
borrowed wagon. We found that rumor had been correct: urban areas were
crawling with Muskies. But we needed tools and equipment of all kinds
and descriptions, badly enough to risk our lives repeatedly for them. It
went slowly, but Dalhousie had his priorities right, and soon we were ready.

We opened our first factory that spring, on a hand-cleared site in the
south valley (which we christened "Southtown"). Our first product had
been given careful thought, and we chose well if for the wrong reasons.
We anticipated difficulty in convincing people to buy goods from us with
barter, when they could just as easily have scavenged from the abandoned
urban areas. In fact, one of our central reasons for founding Fresh
Start had been the conviction that the lice on a corpse are not a going
concern: we did not want our brother survivors to remain dependent on a
finite supply of tools, equipment and processed food. If we could risk
Musky attack, so could others.

Consequently we selected as our first product an item unobtainable
anywhere else, and utterly necessary in the changed world: effective
nose plugs. I suggested them; Krishnamurti designed them and the
primitive assembly line on which they were first turned out, and
Dalhousie directed us all in their construction. All of us, men and
women, worked on the line. It took us several months to achieve success,
and by that time we were our own best customers our factory smelled most
abominable. Which we had expected, and planned for: the whole concept of
Fresh Start rested on the crucial fact that prevailing winds were
virtually always from the north. On the rare occasions when the wind
backed, the Nose formed a satisfactory natural barrier.

Once we were ready to offer our plugs for sale, we began advertising and
recruiting on a large scale. Word of our plans was circulated by word of
mouth, mimeographed flyer and short-wave broadcast. The only person who
responded by the onset of winter was Helen Phinney, but her arrival was
providential, freeing us almost overnight from dependence on stinking
gasoline-powered generators for power. She was then and is now
Fresh-Start's only resident world-class genius, a recognized expert on
what were then called "alternative" power sources the only ones Carlson
had left us. She quite naturally became a part of the planning process,
as well as a warm friend of us all. Within a short time the malodorous
generators had been replaced by water power from the streams that
cascade like copious tears from the "bridge" of the Nose, and ultimately
by methane gas and wind power from a series of eggbeater-type windmills
strung along the Nose itself. In recent years the generators have been
put back on the line, largely for industrial use but they no longer burn
gasoline, nor does the single truck we have restored to service. Thanks
to Phinney, they burn pure grain alcohol which we distill ourselves from
field corn and rye, which worksmore efficiently than gasoline and
produces only water and carbon dioxide as exhaust. (Pre-Exodus man could
have used the same fuel in most of his internal combustion engines but
once Henry Ford made his choice, the industry he incidentally created
tended of course to perpetuate itself.)

This then was the Council of Fresh Start, assembled by fate: myself, a
dreamer, racked with guilt and seeking a truly worthwhile penance,
trying to salvage some of the world I'd helped ruin. Krishnamurti,
utterly practical wizard at both requirements analysis and design
engineering, translator of ideas into plans. Dalhousie, the ultimate
foreman, gifted at reducing any project to its component parts and
accomplishing them with minimum time and effort. Phinney, the energy
provider, devoted to drawing free power from the natural processes of
the universe. Our personalities blended as well as our skills, and by
that second spring we were a unit: the Council. I would suggest a thing,
Krishnamurti would design the black box, Dalhousie would build it and
Phinney would throw power to it. We fit. Together we feltuseful again,
more than scavenging survivors.

No other recruits arrived during the winter, which like the one before
was unusually harsh for that part of the world (perhaps owing to the
sudden drastic decline in the worldwide production of waste heat), but
by spring volunteers began arriving in droves. We got all kinds:
scientists, technicians, students, mechanics, handymen, construction
workers, factory hands, a random assortment of men seeking Civilized
work. A colony of canvas tents grew in Northtown, in cleared areas we
hoped would one day hold great dormitories. Our initial efforts that
summer were aimed at providing water, power, and sewage systems for our
growing community, and enlarging our nose-plug factory. A combination
smithy-repair shop-motor pool grew of its own accord next to the factory
in Southtown, and we began bartering repair work for food with local
farmers to the east and northwest.

By common consent, all food, tools, and other resources were shared
equally by all members of the community, with the single exception of
mad Gallipolis's summer homes. We the Council members retained these
homes, and have never been begrudged them by our followers (two of the
homes were incomplete at the time of the Exodus, and remained so for
another few years). That aside, all the inhabitants of Fresh Start stand
or fall, eat or starve together. The Council's authority as governing
committee has never in all the ensuing years been either confirmed or
seriously challenged. The nearly two hundred technicians who have by now
assembled to our call continue to follow our advice because it works:
because it gives their lives direction and meaning, because it makes
their hard-won skills useful again, because it pays them well to do what
they do best, and thought they might never do again.

During that second summer we were frequently attacked by Muskies,
invariably from the north, and suffered significant losses. For
instance, Samuel Pegorski, the young hydraulic engineering major who
with Phinney designed and perfected our plumbing and sewage systems, was
cut down by the windriders before he lived to hear the first toilet
flush in Northtown.

But with the timely arrival of Philip Collaci, an ex-Marine and former
police chief from Pennsylvania, our security problems disappeared. A
preternaturally effective fighting man, Collaci undertook to recruit,
organize and train the Guard, comprising enough armed men to keep the
northern perimeter of Fresh Start patrolled at all times. At first,
these Guards did no more than sound an alarm if they smelled Muskies
coming across the lake, whereupon all hands made for the nearest shelter
and tried to blank their minds to the semitelepathic creatures.

But Collaci was not satisfied. He wanted an offensive weapon or, failing
that, a defense better than flight. He told me as much several times,
and finally I put aside administrtive worries and went to work on the
problem from a biochemical standpoint.

It seemed to me that extreme heat should work, but the problem was to
devise a delivery system. Early experiments with a salvaged flamethrower
were unsatisfactory the cone of fire tended to brush Muskies out of its
path instead of consuming them. Collaci suggested a line of
alcohol-burning jets along the north perimeter, ready to guard Fresh
Start with a wall of flame, an idea which has since been implemented but
at the time we could not spare the corn or rye to make the alcohol to
power the jets. Finally, weeks of research led to the successful
development of "hot-shot" ammunition which could be fired from any
existing heavy-caliber weapon after its barrel had been replaced, that
would ignite as it cleared the modified barrel and generate enormous
heat as it flew, punching through any Musky it encountered and
destroying it instantly. An early mixture of magnesium and perchlorate
of potash has since given way to an even slower-burning mix of aluminum
powder and potassium permanganate which will probably remain standard
until the last Musky has been slain. (Long-range plans for long-range
artillery shot will have to wait until we can find a good cheap source
of cerium, zirconium or thorium unlikely in the near future.) Hot-shot's
effective range approximates that of a man's nose on a still day good
enough for personal combat. This turned out to be the single most
important advance since the Exodus, not only for mankind, but for the
fledgling community ofFresh Start.

Because our only major misjudgment had been the climate of social
opinion in which we expected to find ourselves. I said earlier that we
feared people would scavenge from cities rather than buy from us, even
in the face of terrible danger from the Muskies who prowled the urban
skies. This turned out not to be the case.

Mostly, people preferred to do without.

Secure in our retreat, we had misjudged thezeitgeist , the mind of the
common man. It was Collaci, fresh from over a year of wandering up and
down the desolate eastern seaboard, who showed us our error. He made us
realize that Lot was probably more eager to return to Gomorrah than the
average human was to return to his cities and suburbs. Cities had been
the scenes of the greatest racial trauma since the Flood, the places
where friends and loved ones had died horribly and the skies had filled
with Muskies. The Exodus and the subsequent weeks of horror were
universally seen as the Hammer of God falling on theidea of city
itself, and hardcore urbanites who might have debated the point were
mostly too dead to do so. The back-to-nature movement, already in full
swing at the moment when Carlson dropped the flask, took on the stature
and fervor of a Dionysiac religion.

Fortunately, Collaci made us see in time that we would inevitably share
in the superstition and hatred accorded to cities, become associated in
the common mind with the evil-smelling steel-and-glass behemoth from
which men had been so conclusively vomited. He made us realize something
of the extent of the suspicion and intolerance we would incur not
ignored for our redundance, but loathed for our repugnance.

At Collaci's suggestion Krishnamurti enlisted the aid of some of the
more substantial farmers in neighboring regions to the east, northeast,
and northwest. He negotiated agreements by which farmers who supported
us with food received preferential access to Musky-killing ammunition,
equipment maintenance and, one day (he promised), commercial power. I
could never have sold the idea myself while I have always understood
public relations well from the theoretical standpoint, I have never been
very successful in interpersonal diplomacy at least, with nontechnicals.
The dour Krishnamurti might have seemed an even more unlikely choice but
his utter practicality convinced many a skeptical farmer where charm
might have failed.

Krishnamurti's negotiations not only assured us a dependable supply of
food (and incidentally, milled lumber), it had the invaluable secondary
effect of gaining us psychological allies, non-Technos who were
economically and emotionally committed to us.

* * *

Work progressed rapidly once our recruiting efforts began to pay off,
and by our fifth year the Fresh Start of today was visible, at least in
skeleton form. We had cut interior roads to supplement the northern and
southern loops left by gyppo loggers two decades before; three
dormitories were up and a fourth a-building; our "General Store" was a
growing commercial concern; a line of windmills was taking shape along
the central ridge of the Nose; our sewage plantmethane converter was
nearly completed; plans were underway to establish a hospital and to
blast a tunnel through the Nose to link North- and Southtowns; the "Tool
Shed," the depot which housed irreplaceable equipment and tools, was
nearly full; and Southtown was more malodorous than ever, with a large
fuel distillery, a chemistry lab, and glass-blowing, match-making and
weaving operations adjoining the hot-shot and nose-plug factories.

Despite these outward signs of prosperity, we led a precarious
existence there was strong public sentiment in favor of burning us to
the ground, at least among the surviving humans who remained landless
nomads. To combat this we were running and distributing a small
mimeographed newspaper,Got News , and maintaining radio station WFS
(then and now the only one in the world). In addition, Krishnamurti and
I made endless public relations trips for miles in every direction to
explain our existence and purpose to groups and individuals.

But there were many who had no land, no homes, no families, nothing but
a vast heritage of bitterness. These were the precursors of today's
so-called Agro Party. Surviving where and as they could, socialized for
an environment that no longer existed, they hated us for reminding them
of the technological womb which had unforgivably thrust them out. They
raided us, singly and in loosely organized groups, often with
unreasonable, suicidal fury. From humanitarian concerns as much as from
public relations considerations, I sharply restrained Guard Chief
Collaci, whose own inclination was to shoot any saboteur he
apprehended wherever possible, they were captured and turned loose
outside city limits. Collaci argued strongly for deterrent violence, but
I was determined to show our neighbors that Fresh Start bore ill will to
no man, and overruled him.

In that fifth year, however, I was myself overruled.

Collaci and his wife Karen (a tough, quiet, redheaded woman) had been
given one of Gallipolis's uncompleted cabins, the one farthest and most
isolated from Northtown's residential area. A volunteer house-raising
had finished it off handsomely the previous spring. It was either bad
judgment or ignorance that brought the seven-man raiding party past the
Collaci home on their way to blow up the Tool Shed. But it was
unquestionably bad judgment that made them kidnap Karen Collaci when
they blundered across her in the forest. She was diabetic, and they had
no insulin.

Collaci left his duties without authorization and pursued them, found
her body within a few days. He tracked the seven guerillas over a period
of a week. Although they had split up and fled in different directions,
those seven days sufficed him. He exacted from them penalties which
cannot be repeated here, left each nailed to a tree, and upon his return
to Fresh Start slept for three consecutive days.

Collaci's understandably impulsive action seems in the light of history
to have been more correct than my own policy of tolerance. At any rate,
we have never been raided since.

With the advent of Dr. Michael Gowan, a former professor of psychology
from Stony Brook who undertook to create and administrate an educational
system, all the necessary seeds had, to my mind, been planted. Barring
catastrophe, technological man now could and would survive. Someday,
perhaps, he might rebuild what had been destroyed.

And then, one day in 1999, I interviewed and "hired" a new arrival named
Jordan Washington. . . .

 


  CHAPTER NINE


      From the Journal of Isham Stone

Breakfast had been ominously superb. After four days of foodtabs, it
could hardly have helped it. One of the nice things about eating real
food indoors is that the aromas remain, lingering on the palate long
after the last bite has been consumed. The other comfort of home I
really appreciated was having been allowed to bathe. Our group had
spread out considerably in the last twenty miles or so, and not from
fear of attack.Gee, it's great to be back.  

The room was one I knew well, although I hadn't seen it for years. It
was large and comfortably furnished. Three walls were stacked floor to
ceiling with a mighty collection of books that spilled over into a
series of standup library shelves on the opposite end of the room.
Escher and Frazetta prints lined what free wall-space there was, and
there was not an uncomfortable chair in the room. From the huge
curtained picture window on my right, dawn splashed the long oak table
at which I sat, with the remains of my breakfast scattered before me.

I had spent a good many hours of my life sitting at that table, often
alone with a book, as often with the owner of books, table and room: Dr.
Michael Gowan, Fresh Start's Director of Education. The room held his
spoor, and I wondered where he was, now that his home had been picked
for V.I.P. prison.

Collaci watched in impassive silence while I ate, ate in silence while I
watched. Since that one burst of loquaciousness after the Musky attack
three days before, I hadn't been able to get a rise out of him. He
didn't seem to regret having explained the facts of life to me but his
interest in further conversation was negligible. I wondered if he had
opened up that night from a sense of obligation, payment of a debt of
honor Teach' hates to lose men under his command. The notion left me
feeling cheapened, as if he'd left fifty dollars on the bed on his way out.

The two armed Guards also watched me in silence, as they had since we
arrived in the middle of the night, and there was never the faintest
chance of suckering anyone into the line of fire. I had dozed off in the
uncanny stillness before dawn, but I'm certain no one else gave sleep a
thought. Four days and three nights of good behavior hadn't earned me so
much as an inch of slack, and if I wanted to get a high-velocity slug
through my head, all I had to do was look clever when I buttered my
toast. Collaci might have been sneakingly grateful for my pacifist
powwow with the Sirocco Brothers, but his hired guns appeared to lack
the imagination. If anything, their fear-hate had smelled stronger than
ever lately. They had seen me commune somehow with things that mankind
had sensed, feared, and loathed for centuries, and the happy outcome was
irrelevant.If he's on our side went one grumble I had overheard on the
trek homewhyn't he line them Muskies up where we c'd pick 'em off   

Of course, they were by no means an accurate reflection of the kinds of
minds I'd have to deal with when the Council convened, but they were a
depressing preview of the sort of grass-roots reaction I could expect.
It soured the maple syrup right on the pancakes.

All that silence got oppressive, so I got up and heated up Dr. Mike's
radio (which he still calls a "tuner," even though the useless tuning
knob has long since been removed for salvage). But it didn't help much.
Dan O'Connor, who replaced me at the board when I split for New York,
had become just as rotten a DJ as I'd known he would. His voice was a
thin monotone over the AR-4s, and he had apparently decided on a morning
program of Latin music. Worst, he forgot to change the selector when he
shifted from disc to tape, and let a good twenty seconds of dead air go
out before he noticed the absence of signal.

I switched off in disgust, sat down again, and watched Collaci gulp the
remains of his coffee, which unlike my own was still hot. Mine had been
given to me with too much milk, too cool to seriously discommode anyone
if I happened to spill it in their eyes. It's those little ego-boosts
that keep you going.

"Hey Teach'," I asked him cheerily, "can I call you for a witness " I
wanted to needle him, to break through that impenetrable cool and wrest
from him a genuine emotion, any emotion at all. Fat chance.

"Son," he said, looking me in the eye, "you can call WendellCarlson
for a witness. You can call Marie Antoinette, or the Spirit of Christmas
Past. No one'll stop you."

I nodded. "It is expedient that one man should etcetera."

He nodded right back at me. There was just enough expression on his face
to half-fill a gnat's pocket. If Teach' had any feelings at all, they
were so well shielded a telepath might have missed them. I felt a surge
of anger, and sat on it fast.Who's needling who  I asked myself.Keep
your cool, my man.  

Myself replied that it made no slightest bit of difference whether I was
calm in the next few hours or not it would have made precious little
difference if I'd been unconscious, or absent. The script's conclusion
was written; this was only the performance, and to a closed house at that.

So sometimes the ad-libs make the show. Nobody listens to an angry man,
and Wendell is counting on you. 

Footsteps sounded outside the window, heard through the open doorway. A
group of people crunching up the gravel path. One of the Guards left the
library on cat feet, and the one covering me went that one last
increment toward becoming one with his weapon. Teach' himself sat
motionless, a granite promontory carved by the pounding sea into a
remarkable likeness of a man.

"It begins," I said, and was annoyed at the hoarseness of the first
syllable.

"Yes," he said, and his voice was just as hoarse.

The guard returned almost at once, with the three people I had been
expecting: Dalhousie, Phinney, and Krishnamurti. The Council of Fresh
Start. There ensued a long pause, during which all three busied
themselves with not meeting my eyes or each other's, which was ludicrous
enough to restore my good humor.

George Dalhousie clumped in first, the doorway fitting him as snugly as
ever. George is no bigger than a Kodiak bear, and I've seen oxen I
believe were stronger. He wore his usual faded denims, and an ancient
cracked leather jacket against the morning chill. Big mud-stained
engineer's boots encased his feet. His square tanned face was deeply
lined, the eyes bagged. His shapeless cap of pepper-and-salt hair was
still damp from the shower, and he had shaved hastily. His expression
and spoor were not hard to read: George was horribly embarrassed.

Next came Helen Phinney, as immaculate as ever. Her grey hair was yanked
back into its customary tight bun, and her lipstick had been drawn with
the same precision as one of her circuit diagrams. She smelled mad. As I
had expected, she wore black, and her carriage was rigid, as though she
were maintaining her organic integrity by an effort of will. I read her
hollow eyes and the set of her mouth, and knew that she had loved Dad
very much. (He and I spoke of it once. I asked him why he hadn't ever
married Helen. "She's white," he had said shortly and changed the
subject). I wondered if she had heard my tape or even listened to it.
She glanced at my stump, then away, and I'd have sworn I saw her smile.

Last to enter was Sarwar Krishnamurti, a man cross-filed under several
headings in my mind. Systems Planning Chief. Friend of Jacob Stone.
Founding Uncle of the Techno Philosophy. Present unofficial mayor of
Fresh Start: the man minding the store, anyhow.

And father of Alia.

He looked as crusty as ever (dammit, all three of them were "as ever."
It seemed to me they ought to be changed somehow, marked by the decision
to take my life. Did I look the same to them as before I'd killed Dad )
He was nearly as tall as Dalhousie, massed perhaps half as much, yet
there was nothing gangly about him. His Fu Manchu moustache emphasized
the lean planed length of his face and the elongated neck. He wore a
tweed suit with vest and a wide necktie, which contrasted ludicrously
with his leather sandals. From a mouth like a slit in a piece of paper
jutted an empty meerschaum identical with the one my father had been
smoking the last time I saw him. He had been more than Dad's second in
command had in some ways been almost a spouse. The two thought alike,
dressed alike, worked together, shared so many mannerisms that it was
impossible to tell who had originated which. Seeing him I felt just a
bit like Hamlet in the first act. Which made his customary
expression purest scorn more sardonic than ever. He took in my stump,
with all the rest of me, in a single sweeping look.

He glanced at his two companions as if realizing for the first time
their utter incompetence for the task ahead, which is how he looks at
everybody, all the time, and motioned curtly to Collaci. The lean
security chief left at once without a backward look, followed by the two
Guards. I started to speak, and then subsided, concentrated on measuring
my breaths.

The three seated themselves at the opposite end of the table. Dalhousie
placed a battery-operated cassette-corder on the table between us and
made a few quick level tests, then sat back and left it purring.

Well, pal, here you go. Tell 'em what they have to know."Howdy, folks."

"Isham Stone," Krishnamurti began formally, "we the Council of F . . ."

"Cool it, Krish. Nobody here but us chickens. You aren't gonna make
Nixon's Mistake and put that tape in the archives, so why bother
pretending this is a legitimate session of the Council  You're Uncle
Krish, Uncle George and Aunt Helen, and my name is Mud let's get on with
the killing."

Dalhousie clouded up, but Krish restrained him with only a shadow of a
gesture. "What makes you think this is not a legitimate Council session,
Isham "

I didn't want to get Teach' in trouble (although I couldn't quite
remember why not), so I skipped the main reason. "The time. The
location, and its owner's mysterious absence. The absence of audience,
secretary, Guards and counsel. The ridiculous look on George's face . .
. shall I go on "

"That will not be necessary," Krish said drily. "You are correct. This
is a closed session."

"Star chamber isn't that the phrase "

"Now listen here," Dalhousie began indignantly.

"Shut up, George," Phinney told him.

"But Helen, he's implying . . ."

"Save it. He's right. Let's get on with it." Dalhousie still looked
indignant, but he shut up.

"We shall require from you," Krish went on as if there had been no
interruption, "all the data you have acquired regarding the Musky race."

I showed him my teeth. "And if you get it  "

Dalhousie boiled over. "You want areward for aiding your own race
against those living farts " he roared. "You're going to withhold vital
strategic information andbargain with us "

"Well, I confess I had some small hope of coming out of this alive,
yes." That jolted him, bringing the guilt back to his face. "Ifit
looks like that can be arranged, andif you manage to convince me that
you're capable of using the data wisely, I might be persuaded to tell
you what I know. But frankly I find both propositions dubious."

"What makes you think that we intend your death, Isham " Krish asked,
utterly poker-faced.

"I'm a big boy now, Krish. Look me in the eye and tell me I'm wrong."

He steepled his fingers and frowned. "You do seem less nave than the
boy who made that tape recording," he acknowledged. "It is a shame that
you came to wisdomafter murdering Jacob."

"Executing," I corrected. Helen went white, but Krish cut her off.

"If I allow the correction, it makes you no less a fool. Who appointed
you judge, jury, and executioner "

"My father," I said simply.

Three mouths opened and shut.

"Dad was the fool," I went on, "and his stupidity, coupled with pesky
bad luck, destroyed most of the world and ultimately himself. It may yet
destroyme, and the rest of the human race. But not if I can get you
three tolisten to what I have to say."

"Then you will talk " Dalhousie asked.

"If you can convince me there's any percentage in it."

"What will it take to convince you, Isham " Krish asked smoothly. "A
guarantee of your life "

"No, that'd convince me that you were lying. I'd like you to answer some
questions."

"This is ridiculous," Phinney burst out. "We don't need his cooperation.
Send for scopalamine and peel him like a grape." Her eyes were bright.

"Shut up, Helen,"Krishnamurti snapped. "What are your questions, Isham "

"What will you do with the information if I give it to you "

They left it up to Krish. He took his time answering, which pleased me I
didn't want a knee-jerk response. But of course it made little difference.

"You have apparently learned how to communicate with the Muskies," he
said with an expression of distaste. "We feel that in so doing you may
have gained information which will help turn the tide in the present
combat before our race is annihilated. We need an edge, Isham. Perhaps
you can give it to us. If so, it is your duty as a human to do so. And
if it is a spectacular enough edge, from a public relations point of
view, we may I say `may' be able to grant you your life."

Boy, I was tempted. "And your ultimate intentions toward the Musky race "

His answer was immediate. "Its destruction."

Here it came. The big question. Everything depended on their answers and
whether or not I believed them.

"What if I could bring you not victory, but peace "

That rocked all three. They all began talking at once, and it was a
while before Krish was able to silence the others. When he had, he
paused himself for a long moment, a new expression on his swarthy face.
It was the one I had hoped against hope to see, the expression of a man
reexamining his axioms.

"The possibility had never occurred to me," he admitted to me at last.
"I'm not certain I believe you. Do you seriously contend that a
human-Musky treaty could be negotiated "

"I think there's a chance. Do you want to hear about it "

"Yes."

Dalhousie started to speak, then thought better of it. He obviously had
reservations, but just as obviously he intended to keep them to himself
if it would get me to talk. Helen Phinney's expression was unreadable.
Dammit, I could be playing into their hands but if there was ever to be
a chance, it was now. I had to gamble. "All right. Here's the story."

Krish's face was absolutely expressionless, an irregularity on the front
of his skull.

"First I must tell you why the War started. Muskies have been around for
longer than we have. A lot longer. Their race was born in the days when
Earth was still a volcanic hell with an unbreathable atmosphere, and in
those days they flourished. Their First Golden Age ended at roughly the
same time that life as we know it began to evolve on the planet's
surface, and their numbers gradually fell to a fraction of a percent of
what they had once been. But they did not vanish. Their race survived,
with the merest shadow of its former glory. Christ only knows how they
reproduce, but evolution somehow thoughtfully cross-wired the process to
the available food supply something that might have saved our own race
endless centuries of war and bloodshed. On a geologic time scale, they
adjusted to the new conditions quite easily. For thousands of years,
their `food' supply remained small but relatively stable. So, therefore,
did their numbers.

"Then came the change.

"It was shockingly sudden, by their standards, because their individual
life-spans are so many times longer than our own. I don't think they
ever fully understood it. In a mere couple of hundred years practically
overnight the available `food' supply increased hundreds, then thousands
of times. Sheer reflex triggered off a breeding explosion, and in the
last fifty years their population began to climb drastically, in
inexorable geometric progression. Slowly the Muskies came to understand
that this demographic upset had been brought about by creatures living
on the Earth's surface the ones whose emotional broadcasts had been
entertaining them for so long. For some reason humans had from the Musky
point of view chosen to interfere drastically with their destiny."

"Wait a goddamned minute," Dalhousie blurted. "I don't get it. How
didwe make their food supply increase  What the helldo they eat "

I grinned at him. "Helen's figured it out. Haven't you, Helen  Tell
Uncle George what Muskies eat."

"Air pollution," she said, whitefaced.

Dalhousie's face went utterly slack; simultaneously his shoulders
knotted and swelled under the leather. The effect was so fascinating I
almost missed the way Krishnamurti's eyes narrowed to slits. I wondered
if he'd made the intuitive leap to the solution I meant to propose. I
went on.

"See the implications, George  Those funny ground-huggers took to
gathering together in bunches and mass-producing food. And then, when
they'd artificially boosted the Musky population to an ecologically
dangerous level, utterly disrupting an ancient and stable culture,they
cut off the food supply literally overnight . The sulfur dioxide, the
lead oxides, all the tasty hydrocarbons, all vanished instantly and for
keeps. And at the same time all those Indian givers began going berserk,
filling the emotional `ether' with broadcasts of terror, agony and
despair. They began to slay each other, themselves,
and astonishingly Muskies. For the first time in history, humans
revealed an ability to perceive Muskies, and used it to kill.

"So what did the Muskies do  What would you do, George "

"My god," he said hoarsely, and swallowed. "No wonder. No wonder."

Helen Phinney was tougher; her face was almost unnaturally composed. "It
explains much," she said softly.

"It damned well does," Dalhousie exclaimed. "That Agro charge . . .

"Shut up, George!" Krishnamurti rapped.

"Yeah, George," I agreed. "You almost slipped and told me that we've
always known Jordan's right when he claims that Musky raids tend to
center around Fresh Start."

"Who told   Oh!" Krishnamurti looked disgusted.

"Right, Krish Dad again. Ever since Jordan made that charge two years
ago, our P.R. department pardon me, our Good Neighbors Bureau has been
blandly falsifying statistics to prove it's all a lie. Iknow  I work
in the radio station, remember  Only it ain't a lie.The Muskies hang
around downwind of Fresh Start because it's a soup kitchen. And they
hang around cities for the same reason. When I first breathed New York
air unplugged, it seemed worse than it could naturally be after twenty
years and so it was. The Muskies figured some way of hermetically
enclosing the city, sealing in the last of the `food,' and they've been
rationing it out ever since.

"But we're probably the only place on earth producing new food. In small
quantities, yes but producing."

"Then you're with Jordan," Dalhousie barked. "You're saying we should
shut down Fresh Start, let technological civilization die forever and go
back to the Stone Age." His face was reddening.

"Nuts," I replied. "I'm saying we should export smog."

Dalhousie and Phinney went into the jaw-dropping routine again.
Krishnamurti's eyes still looked like paper cuts.Hit 'em while they're
groggy, my man. I plowed on urgently.

"Think about it, George Helen Krish. Think of the kind of work you could
accomplish if you didn't have to have three men guard every one working,
if you didn't have to waste time and materials and power Musky-proofing
every work-zone, if you didn't have to devote so much energy to
mass-producing hot-shot and compatible weaponry, if you didn't keep
losing good men to Musky raiders. How much more could you accomplish if
the farmers and Agros who live around this burg weren't half-crazy with
fear  How would you like free safe access to the tools and equipment of
the cities  How would you like to be able to walk safely outdoors with a
head cold How would you like to stop all thekilling " I was startled
by my own vehemence, and discovered that I was bathed in sweat.

"What sort of . . . treaty are you proposing " Krishnamurti asked quietly.

"A simple symbiosis. If the Muskies promise to leave us alone to rebuild
a technology, we promise to do it. We workwith them, work out ways to
expand at a stable, even rate beneficial to both sides. Dammit, if we
use our fucking brains we can have industry and clean air both the
Muskies'll eat our pollution for us. But it'll call for understanding
and good communications."

"Which you can provide " Krishnamurti asked just a hair too smoothly.

"Hell, no," I said. "I've been working on talking to Muskies for weeks
now and I haven't gotten past the `Me Tarzan you Jane' stage. And that
ain't even the big problem."

"Explain."

"Look: Muskies come in groups, called Names. Each Name contains anywhere
from three to forty Muskies, and each individualis the Name talk to
one and you're talking to them all. It's a group-mind, with certain
qualifications that are so subtle I don't understand them myself."Sure
giving away a lot of free information, old son. Fuck it, I've got to
convincethem. "But there are thousands of Names still living, the
survivors of starvation and human firepower and communicationbetween
them can only be accomplished through the High Muskies."

"What the hell are High Muskies " Dalhousie snapped.

"The aristocracy, George. The elders, the older and wiser heads. The
Musky Council, if you will. Their diminished mass keeps them mostly in
the upper stratosphere, though I'm not certain whether that's a matter
of preference or necessity. I can't tell you why they can communicate
with any Musky while the Names can't communicate with each other. I
can't explain the relationships between High Muskies and Names. I can't
even tell you for sure how much of this is fact and how much is
guesswork the distinction gets vague when you're talking with a Musky.
But I can tell you with intuitive emotional certainty that the High
Muskies are the key to ending the War. We'vegot to get to talk with
one, people, and soon."

"What do you propose " Krishnamurti asked again.

"Drop everything and begin constructing some sort of flying machine," I
replied at once. I'd had the walk from New York to perfect this. "From
what I know of Fresh Start's technical capabilities I would suggest a
balloon, capable of lifting two or three people and about fifty pounds
of electronic equipment. While that's being done in fact, before it's
begun send an expedition to New York to work with Wendell Carlson."
Phinney sucked air through her teeth. "I know we haven't got any
semanticists or philologists, butsome body better qualified than me
has to learn to talk with the windriders. I'd recommend Dr. Mike, and
anybody else we've got who's good with languages. No sense sending 'em
an embassy if the ambassadors can't speak the lingo."

"And when the . . . ambassadors have learned the `lingo,' and the
balloon is ready " Krish prompted, Eastern features impassive.

"Send 'em up and have 'em start learning High Musky. If they can
accomplish that, they can try to work out some sort of peaceful
coexistence agreement."

"And their chances of surviving "

"I believe excellent. No Musky with whom I've `spoken' has displayed the
slightest aggression.I don't know what goes on in whatever they use
for heads, but apparently the ability to communicate is enough to raise
you from the class of `them damn crazy vermin' to `potential people.' I
can't say I've ever reallycommunicated with them half the time both
sides get confused as hell but we always part amicably. Our ambassadors
may be a long time getting understood, but they'll be safe enough while
they're trying. They might even be able to get an interim cease-fire in
Fresh Start and surrounding areas."

I paused, took a deep breath and looked carefully at all three. "So
there you go, people. There's the story, there's the chance of peace and
the hope of the race. What do you say to a way to end the War and give
the survivors for the first time in history clean technology, not to
mention a new and rich culture to exchange with and learn from  The
Muskies are an ancient and wise people who never knew war until men
taught it to them let's make peace with them and get on with the
business of rebuilding the world. What do you say "

And so it was all said, and I shut up to give them time to think it
over. In the sudden silence, I saw Dalhousie's features go slack again,
a sure sign that he was thinking at full speed. Phinney was frowning
furiously, chewing hell out of a good lipstick job and drumming silver
fingernails on the tabletop. Krishnamurti stared with a fixed intensity
at that same tabletop, as if fascinated by the interplay of grain on its
surface.

It was the noisiest silence I ever heard.

And while I was supposed to be studying my inquisitors, I found myself
distracted by my own thoughts and emotions. The sincerity in my last
words astonished me. To be sure, my life literally depended on the
Council's decision but I was startled to discover the priority that had
in my feelings. With something like shock I discovered that ending the
War was more important to me than my personal survival, that I would
willingly die to bring about peace. The suspense I felt in regarding my
inquisitors was not for myself alone but for my people, for the idea of
humankind. For someone like me it was a hell of a realization. I
wouldn't have been willing to die to kill Wendell Carlson, back when
that seemed the prime motivation of my life I undertook the task because
I believed I could do it.Hara-kiri 's not my style or at least, it
hadn't been.Altruism at your age, old son  You've been hanging around
Wendell too long.  

Or maybe just long enough 

I yanked my attention back to the tactical situation, confused and
off-balance. Krishnamurti was looking directly into my eyes, and I started.

"A very good try, Isham," he said slowly, and my heart sank. "It very
nearly worked. Your story has a kind of internal consistency which
belies its basic absurdity. But it won't wash."

Dalhousie had been ready to agree; he back-pedaled mentally. "What are
you saying, Sarwar "

Krishnamurti smiled for the first time that morning. "Come now, George.
You haven't been taken in by this ridiculous story  Use Occam's Razor,
for heaven's sake. Isham here is sent to New York to execute Carlson. He
returns, admitting that he failed and was held prisoner for an
indefinite time by Carlson and his Musky friends, admitting that they
drugged him, and the first thing he does is to murder his father. He
flees back to his alien companions and the exiled renegade, and is
brought back here only by force, over Musky opposition from what Collaci
told me last night. In defense of all this he claims that Jacob was a
madman, Carlson is a saint, and the Muskies are misunderstood creatures
with whom we picked a fight. He advises that we drop our defenses and
make a peace which will in one stroke solve all the problems of mankind.
Isn't it obvious he's been brainwashed in some way by Wendell Carlson 
Isn't it obvious that he is a tool in that psycopath's plan to destroy
his own kind, a plan thatbegan eighteen years ago and is not yet
complete "  

"But . . ." George began.

"Think, man," Krishnamurti pushed on, with just a bit too much
determination for a man interested in examining a question fairly.
"Think. Did you really believe the tape that Isham left behind after he
murdered Jacob  Do you believe that Jacob Stone, who built Fresh Start
with his own two hands, was the madman, and a bearded hermit in New York
the savior of mankind  Do you  "

"It's true," I said flatly, hopelessly. "Guilt built Fresh Start. Dad's
guilt. And Wendell's may yet save it."

"A good try indeed, Isham. I wish we could take the time to reverse your
brainwashing and return you to sanity. I really do; I've always rather
liked you. But it is a matter of urgent political necessity that we
execute you at once." His lips curled up in the ghost of a sad smile.
"Perhaps it is as well. If I had murdered the most loved and needed man
in the world, I would rather die convinced my action was correct."

"I would rather," Phinney said icily, "that he die in full knowledge of
his crime."

"Now, Helen," Krishnamurti soothed, "vengeance is pointless; if Jacob
had realized that, he might be alive today. Reparation will do quite
nicely. Let's patch up the mess his death caused and get on with the job."

"Get Collaci in here," I said suddenly.

"Why "

"I want him for a witness."

Krishnamurti frowned. "I see no useful purpose . . ."

"You're going to take my life and I don't get to call a single witness "

This time it was Dalhousie who spoke. "Dammit, we're dragging this out.
We've heard what he has to say, Sarwar, and we know what we have to do.
Let's finish up."

Krishnamurti nodded. "Isham Stone," he began formally, "You have been
tried for the murder of Jacob Stone and found . . ."

"Excuse me," I said. No point in yelling "Hey rube," with the door
closed the room was soundproof. I rose, turned my back on them and
grasped my chair with my only hand. I came around fast, whipping the
chair like a flail and letting it go at once. It cleared Krishnamurti's
head by three inches, so quickly he never had time to duck, and
shattered the picture window. As glass exploded out into the garden I
continued my pivot, springing headlong toward the library door. It
opened as I was in mid-air, the two Guards spilling into the room with
rifles at the ready. But I was already between the jutting barrels,
clamping one head under my stump and slapping the other into it
savagely. The impact carried all three of us out into the hall, where we
landed in a heap. The Guards stayed down. I was up at once, my hand
prominently empty.

Collaci came through the shattered window in a ball, rolling as he hit
the floor. He finished on his feet half-shielded by a bookshelf, and if
I'd even looked like having a weapon the machine pistol in his hand
would already have cut me in half. I grinned at him.

"Hiya, Teach'. I wanted you here, and they wouldn't call you."

He nodded. "Soyou did. You always did have a weakness for histrionics,
son." He turned to Krishnamurti, who still sat frozen in the same
position he'd held when the chair whistled past his ear. "Not trying to
shut me out, are you, Krish "

Krishnamurti began furious denials, and my grin widened. My primary
purpose in summoning Teach' was already fulfilled he'd listen to the
"trial"-transcript tape now if he had to steal it, and perhaps he'd have
brains enough to see that my proposal was logical and necessary. "What
do you want, Isham " he asked, cutting off Krishnamurti's excuses, and I
went on to my secondary purpose the faint hope that I might still reach
the Council.

"I want to ask you a question, Teach', a question neither Dad nor these
three would ever have asked, even of themselves. In your professional
opinion as Chief of the Guard, as a Musky-fighter of twenty years'
experience,how much longer will the human race survive if the War
continues "  

He was startled, but he didn't need to make any calculations. His eyes
got hard and cold, and his voice came out like a computer-construct.
"Without a major breakthrough in long-range detection and destruction, a
maximum of ten to twelve years."

Dalhousie and Phinney paled, but I could see Krishnamurti deciding to
disbelieve. No good for now, at any rate. "I advise negotiation, folks,"
I said, and gave up. I'd done my best. I could only hope they'd think
over what I'd said.

"Take this man away and guard him well," Krishnamurti snapped at
Collaci. "He stands condemned. Execution will be tomorrow at dawn in
front of the Gate. Don't allow him to speak with anyone at all."

Teach' looked at him for a long time, no readable expression on his
face. "You're the boss," he said at last, and waved the machine pistol
at me. "Let's go, son."

"Sure thing," I agreed, and we started for the door. As we reached it, a
thought struck me and I turned, slowly enough to avoid startling
Collaci's trigger finger.

"Helen," I said softly, and she looked up in surprise. "I'm sorry, Aunt
Helen." I wasn't entirely sure what I meant but I meant it.

She bit her lip. "Go away, Isham."

I nodded and left the Council behind, heading for the light of day. I
hoped Teach' had a joint on him. I needed one.

 


  CHAPTER TEN

There was a terrible hollow-gut feeling in me as I left Gowan's house.
Very little of it had to do with the awareness of mortal danger. The
largest element was ego-bruise. People who knew me had ordered my death.
Hell, they were practically my aunts and uncles they'd watched me grow
up. They say an impersonal killer is a terrible thing Collaci makes a
lot of folks uneasy. But as we walked through the cool quiet of the West
Forest I reflected that personal involvement doesn't make killing much
prettier. A vagrant flutter of thought began:Who are you to talk  but
something smothered it before it really came to my attention. My limp
increased.

Collaci took his instructions literally. Krishnamurti had said "Let him
see no one," and Teach' did his level best. We collected two entirely
trigger-happy Guards outside the house and, rather than going straight
to West Avenue and through the heart of Northtown, Teach' led us through
the forest, around behind his own house, turned east past Dalhousie's
place and brought us out of the forest at the big intersection of the
Loop with South and West Avenues. At that hour it was deserted the herd
going to work had passed nearly an hour ago. I heard the truck in the
distance, but it was heading away from us.

Where we stood the huge granite foot of the Nose took a big bite out of
the southern sky (if you'll pardon a triply-mixed metaphor); beyond it,
downwind of course, lay the factory-lab complex of Southtown. In that
complex the bulk of Fresh Start's population were now hard at work
rebuilding the world or trying to. I felt sudden kinship with them, and
fear for them.

To our left, the two-story bulk of the Tool Shed cut us off from the
view of any slugabeds in the dorms of Northtown. The Shed is an immense
brick warehouse in which virtually all precious and irreplaceable
scientific equipment and tools are stored when not in use everything
from titration flasks and microscopes to metric wrenches and
thermocouples. Given the universal antipathy toward cities and other
Pre-Exodus centers of civilization, those tools are just too precious to
risk. The Shed has a small stockade on its flat, high roof, from which a
Guard with some excellent firepower was regarding us with a bored eye.
Another sign of unrest in the kingdom. The building had survived
countless Agro raids in the old days, but it had not been deemed
necessary to man the battlements for years now. It gave me a hell of an
idea.

The trigger-happy Guards actually made it easier. As I was trying to
work out a plausible approach, I stepped quite accidentally in a
pothole. With a small cry of genuine fear, I went down heavily. Knowing
the Guards were on edge, I rolled sideways as I hit, which would have
been fine except that Collaci also knew his men were edgy and struck
both their gun barrels aside as I went down. One flailing barrel tracked
me as I tumbled, and a slug smacked into the earth by my head. I lay
still, oh very still, and blinked at Teach'.

"You didn't think I'd let these clowns shoot me " I asked plaintively.

"You didn't thinkI'd let them " he returned sourly, and glared at his
men. "Come on, son. On your feet."

I got up, limped tenderly off the road and sat down in the shade, next
to a bracing strut of the right-hand loading dock.

Collaci looked disgusted. "Isham . . ."

"Teach'," I broke in wearily, "you can pick me up and carry me the last
couple of hundred yards, or you can wait two minutes while I get my
breath back. Besides, I think my heel is coming off."

He sighed, and turned to the ape who'd nearly shot me. "Go to the
Hospital and have a paramedic sent to Gowan's home Cole and Jalecki'll
be needing skull transplants. Then go on home and get some sleep." The
man turned to go at once, mortally embarrassed. "Andrews." He turned
back. "Your reaction time is commendable. But next time just kick his
teeth in it's not such a final mistake."

"Yes, sir."

"Get." Teach' came and sat near me, sitting with instinctive caution on
my armless side. My idea was taking shape. A flat stone under my right
thigh decided me. I shifted slightly so that the stone was between my
legs, then pulled my left foot up on my lap with a great show of weariness.

"Feet hurt," I wheezed, and examined the shoe mournfully. The heel was
indeed coming off I decided I was a hotdamn commando but a terrible
cobbler. "Now I've gotta walk around like a duck." I worked the heel the
rest of the way off.

"Not much further."

"You know, Teach', a few months ago I'd have been good and pissed off at
old Andrews there. But I did a very similar thing myself in New York
when I first arrived." I inspected the heel and its protruding nails
disgustedly, and dropped it in my lap. It slid to the ground between my
thighs. "It's not good to think with your adrenals but sometimes you
can't help yourself." I gazed at the mountain, and shielded my eyes
against the sun. "Got a joint "

"Smoking a lot lately," he said, lighting and passing a rather large doobie.

"Only when I get uptight." I took a deep hit, carbureting with air, and
passed it back.

"Ride your nervous system," Collaci advised. "Don't let it ride you."

I exploded. It was easy I actually was a bit uptight. "God DAMMIT," I
bellowed, "I have lost an arm, killed my father, found out that my best
friends on earth are Wendell Carlson and the Muskies, been busted and
dragged a couple hundred miles, been condemned to death by my aunts and
uncles, and my fuckingheel has come off!" I reached between my legs,
grabbed the flat rock and hurled it at the mountain. "I don't need a
laconic flatfoot telling me to stay on top of things!"

It was a critical moment. I had no idea how closely the stone resembled
a broken-off heel for all I knew it was bright blue nor could I sneak a
glance as I flung it. I used my eyes to hold Collaci's but what about
the remaining Guard 

At any rate, my aim was good. Instead of landing on rock, where it would
have made the wrong sound, the stone landed in a patch of scrub grass
where it made no appreciable sound at all ". . . See " I finished,
hoping he didn't.

He looked at me evenly, not speaking, and I flushed convincingly. He
passed me the joint. I took another toke and stared at the ground.

"I think you've got your breath back, son," he said finally, and rose,
unholstering his pistol. I made a song and dance out of getting to my
feet, managing to palm the heel and slap it against the underside of the
loading dock without being seen difficult without another hand to
misdirect with. To my intense relief the nails sank relatively silently
into the big platform, nothing shuffling my feet couldn't cover. The
heel remained when I took my hand away, visible only to a man lying
full-length under the loading dock.

Since all this involved leaving the joint hanging from my mouth, I took
another huge hit. Then, under the prodding of Teach's gun, I started
walking east again, straining to still look harassed when I felt
triumphant. Trying to walk with one leg stiff and the other missing a
heel supplied the necessary irritation a double limp that wasted energy
and slowed me up enough to keep Collaci chivvying me to hurry. We passed
the empty athletic field, the Pantry (an enormous food warehouse
bursting with fruits, grains and vegetables), and finally the Hospital,
just short of the mouth of the Linkin' Tunnel. It was there that Teach's
luck ran out.

Three people stood just inside the Hospital door, two visiting farmers
and a Techno woman. Since the Hospital must always be well ventilated,
the door was naturally open, and they saw us at once.

I guess there just aren't too many one-armed black men around they
recognized me, and their conversational buzz died as though the needle
had been lifted off the record. There went the secrecy for efficient
information dispersal, you just can't beat idle chatter.

I felt a brief impulse to shout out the results of my trial, and I
believe if I had been acquainted with any of the loitering three I would
have. Even less than I liked the idea of my execution did I like the
idea of a lid on it.Let the people know the truth.  

But I reflected, and the impulse passed. An informed populace would be
no help to me in the next twenty-four hours, and a pissed-off Collaci
would actively hamper me.The hellwith the people. Hi there. Just out
fora walk with my good friend Teach', and this gorilla here kindly
consented to carry my bazooka for me. Say, have you seen my keen
newstump  I gave the three what I hoped was an enigmatic smile and
passed on. Collaci said nothing, but the idlers scattered when they saw
his face.

On the opposite corner of Main, beyond the tunnel, stood Security
Headquarters, a rather small sturdy ferrocement building colloquially
known as "the cop on the corner." Directly across South Avenue, to our
right, a wooden stairway led up the steep slope of the Nose to a
heaped-rock emplacement on the north face. From this bunker embrasures
ran in either direction, disappearing almost at once among the
rocks Line Two, Fresh Start's second line of defense. Any Musky raiding
party that gets past the armed men at Line One (between Northtown and
the Lake) runs into more sharpshooters and a wall of alcohol-jet flame
when it reaches the Nose only rare individual Muskies ever threaten the
dozens working, plugged, in Southtown.

I took one last deep toke, gazed wistfully at the Nose while I held it,
then pinched and pocketed the roach. Sighing, I preceded Collaci and the
Guard into Security HQ.Do not collect two hundred dollars. 

It was darker indoors my eyes were a moment adjusting. "Hi, Shorty," I
called out, smelling an old friend. "What's new "

"Howdy, Isham. Noth "

"Shut up, Shorty," the Guard behind me snapped. "This son of a bitch
talks to nobody. Krish's orders."

Shorty Pfeil looked him over, got up from behind his desk and smiled.
They call him Shorty because he stands six-five. If you shipped a barrel
inside Shorty, it'd rattle a lot. "Cal," he said gently, "that running
of the mouth'll land you in the Hospital yet." Cal shut up. "As I was
saying, Isham: `Nothing much, what's new with you ' "

"They shoot me tomorrow morning."

He nodded. "Yeah, if it ain't one damn thing it's another. We're on the
downhill slope; got to run faster all the time just to stay on our feet.
He get the executive suite, chief "

Collaci nodded.

"TV's busted, Isham, and I'm afraid room service ain't what it used to
be but for you, it's on the house."

"I'll take it, Shorty," I said. "Thanks." I really was grateful Shorty's
chatter was the first friendly words I'd heard all week. I thought of a
leopard in Central Park, and smiled. I was glad I'd left my heel at the
Tool Shed. It didn't belong here.

He produced a ring of keys and opened up the larger of the two cells
that make up the rear of the building. It was a stone cube with a barred
window on the far end. Mattress on the left, toilet on the right, three
feet of clearance in the middle. My nose told me that the last tenant
had been Marv Cassidy drunk again. The door was a really impressive
steel-bar affair that must have weighed a quarter ton. If Fresh Start
were suddenly overrun by rampaging brontosaurs, I'd be perfectly
safe but by and by I'd get hungry. I stood in the entrance for a moment,
feeling decidedly at bay. On the other hand, that mattress looked mighty
good. I entered the cell. But there was one last bit of business to be
played out first.

Teach' followed me in, and stood waiting. "I don't tip bellboys," I
said. "No luggage."

"That's what interests me," he admitted. "Let's have that belt, son."

"Eh " Shrewd bastard.

"Open it. Slowly."

I complied. There wasn't any way to hide the knife blade built into the
buckle. I looked disgusted and passed over the belt. My scalp itched.

"Christ, Isham," Collaci said, shaking his head. "Itaught you that
gag." I nodded ruefully. "And I also taught you that one concealed
weapon isn't enough."

Thatshrewd. Damn him.

"Let's see. A smart young fella like you would probably pick a place you
expect people's gaze to avoid. Let's unpin that empty sleeve."

What do you know  There was a sap strapped to my stump. I tried to look
unconcerned, but Teach' was cannier than I'd expected. My scalp itched
something awful.

He stepped outside and closed the door, which snapped shut with a
meatythunk . I sank down wearily on the mattress, feet under me in
lotus. "Don't forget that transcript, Teach'."

He paused on his way out. "I don't expect any surprises."

"Uncle Phil . . . do you like to fight  Or do you just like to win when
you must fight "

The question took him by surprise; I hadn't called him that in ten
years. He got a thoughtful look. At last he said, almost to himself, "I
think you have to get to where you like it, if you intend to keep on
winning, every time." He frowned, and his voice softened. "Sometimes I
get to thinking I'd like to kick the habit and lay up awhile. But it
seems like they just keep a-coming. Fights, I mean, one kind or another.
If I ever get me a sustained break, maybe I'll " He frowned and grinned
at the same time, squinting his wolf's eyes. "Yeah, I like it. Why "

"You looking forward to the next twelve years of it "

He pursed his lips. "Isham, every morning I get up and I put my pants on
one leg at a time."

"And then strap on an arsenal and you're ready to shave. You sleep with
one eye open and you never use plugs, even when the wind's from the
south. I grew up with this crazy world, but don'tyou ever get tired 
You told the Council and you told 'em true. It gets worse from here."

"So "

"Play the transcript."

"I will. But I'm dismally afraid you've figured out How to Save the World."

"And that in your considered opinion can't be done  May we quote you,
Chief Collaci "

"So long, Isham." He left, Cal following like a well-trained gorilla.
I'd done the best I could, sown all the seeds I'd brought with me.

As soon as Shorty Pfeil took his traditional siesta, I shook the
lockpicks out of my afro and tried them, pausing to scratch my scalp
thoroughly. The third pick worked, the same one that had let me into
Columbia University a hundred years ago. I pulled the door closed again,
replaced the picks in my hair, and thenI went to sleep. I had a long
night ahead.

* * *

The first visitor didn't blow my mind at all. In fact, I'd been
expecting him.

Dr. Michael Gowan arrived late in the afternoon, just as I was waking
up. As usual, he managed to make stained overalls into a Techno Tuxedo.
I've seen him look dapper in the shower, and dammit, he's tooold to be
dapper. Not many real blonds can carry off a Van Dyke, but he manages. A
rather short man, elegant and awesomely learned. With a variable staff,
he's kept school runing at Fresh Start a school open to anyone, Techno,
farmer or Agro alike for over fifteen years, constructing curricula,
organizing softball teams, teaching endless tireless hours, riding hard
on a gang of yahoos with fairness and dignity and turning them into
educated adults. He always has a spare half an hour for you, and as far
as I know he sleeps on every third Thursday. He was my teacher all my
life, my personal tutor through early adolescence, and the first adult I
ever relaxed with. If Dad was the father of my body, "Docta Mike" was
the father of my mind.

On my sixteenth birthday, he and I got drunk together on his home-brewed
beer, went for a walk in the woods with three jugs of home-foam, and
woke up two days later in an abandoned warehouse miles from home. The
warehouse turned out to be the Hudson Valley Textbook Supply
repository that is to say, about half of what you'll find in the School
Library today. We stayed for a week, and both caught hell from Dad when
we returned.

I had drifted away from Gowan in the last few years. Dad subtly
disapproved of the things he taught me, and saw to it that I spent an
equal amount of time with Collaci. Both tutors challenged my intellect,
but Collaci was clearly the more glamorous role model and cynicism a
more attractive posture to a young man. And so I stopped coming by the
book-filled library with the picture window, tapered off the evenings of
conversation and discussion, ducked the pesky questions I could not
answer about the thing Ihad to do. Collaci's kind of teaching was
easier to reconcile with the indoctrination I was getting at home.

When I blinked away the thick fog of sleep and saw Gowan standing at the
cell door, I discovered with a detached amusement that I had missed him
very much.

"Hello, doc. Sorry I bust your window."

`The pain was transient."

"No puns, please. A mouse has died in my mouth. We missed you at homeroom."

"You think I enjoyed being evicted at two in the morning  Had the
misfortune to be the only window lit when they needed a place to park
you. Shorty, old fellow, a glass of water for Isham here. I spent the
night on Krishnamurti's couch and the day asking questions that didn't
get answered. Fortunately I had the sense to bug my own study before I
left."

"Doc," I said with genuine relief, "you've just saved mepages of
dialogue." I was a little tired of recapitulating the events of recent
months.

"You should have saved them this morning. Really, Isham, were you that
nave  Or was it simple ignorance "

"The old college try. The truth shall make you free."

"If you can say things like that, I can make puns. Isham, the Council,
individually and as a group,had to ignore your words."

"I know Collaci has explained the political situation. Jordan's Agro
gang is bigger than ever; they've been raiding some of the smaller
farmers that trade with us and threatening the bigger suppliers. One of
those suppliers was killed by Muskies last week, and public sentiment is
turning against us. To announce that our founding father was the man who
dealt this mess in the first place, and that his son has been
collaborating with Muskies, would be asking to have this place burned to
the ground."

"Spurious argument, Isham."

"Say what "

"Specious and spurious. And probably exactly what those three have been
telling each other all day. `Expediency that's why we closed our minds.'
Claptrap! A good politician can sell anything even the truth."

"What do you figure, then  Please don't tell me they have a vested
interest in anti-Musky munitions."

"Any of them would infinitely rather be producing solar-power
units which we can't spare the time or man-power for now. No, Isham.
Politics is made of people."

"Explain."

"Each of the three members of the Council has their own reason for
reaching this morning's decision. Their motivations are subtly different
but amount to the same thing: they will let no political, social or
moral considerations prevent them from punishing you for Jacob's death."

"Look, Dr. Mike, at this point anger would be a comfort. But I can't see
them as that hypocritical. Maybe it'd be simpler and easier to look on
them as villains but I don't."

"Good lord, boy, neither do I. They'repeople . People always do what
they must you of all people should know that. Don't interrupt. You hit
each of those three in a vital spot, the kind of hurt they can't
consciously admit because that would involve recognizing and
acknowledging the vital spot. You opened scars they do not wish to
remember they have. And so they find other, urgently necessary reasons
to crush your head between two boulders. That's not hypocrisy just
rationalization. Which may be just as frustrating to deal with, but not
as culpable the subconscious can plead self-defense."

"They loved Dad that much " I was not convinced. Helen aside, there had
been no great warmth between Dad and his lieutenants. Respect, sure;
friendship, certainly. The four were together a long time, went through
a lot together while I was still learning to use the potty. But not
warmth. Hell,I'd never gotten any real warmth from Dad bare approval
was an achievement.

"Perhaps Helen's prime motivation is close to love in the fifteen years
since your mother died she's never stopped believing that one day Jacob
would warm to her and return her love. And then you went and cut him
down before he could. If you're ever captured, don't let them give you
to the women. Not alive.

"But equally important, Helencannot accept the new version of Jacob.
She's a proud woman, boy you'd have to know how women used to be treated
to understand how proud. If what you claim of Jacob is true, then she
displayed execrable judgment in falling in love with him, in failing to
see through him all these years. She can't accept that. So youmust be
a liar."

"All right. That figures. But what about George and Krish "

"George is the one you couldn't have known about . . . though you might
have guessed. Not many celibates around these days."

"I don't get you. So George is a loner. . . ."

"George is exclusively homosexual. Was, I should say, as he hasn't
functioned sexually at all in all the years I've known him."

"So what " I was mildly surprised, but I knew what homosexuality was;
I'd seen and smelled it in animals. Only the "exclusive" part puzzled
me. Seemed silly.

"Isham, the kind of persecution such people used to incur is another of
those things you'd have to have lived through to understand. We don't
seem to have homosexuals anymore it must be a Civilized luxury but when
we did we hated them. They were called sick, evil, degenerate,
deranged and indeed many were driven off the rails by inner or outer
pressure. It was infinitely harder for such a man or woman to find a
satisfactory partner, to build a lasting relationship.

"George was apparently one of the very lucky few. In his late teens, he
met and ultimately moved in with an engineer named Tom Wocjik, and they
lived together for nearly ten years. Wocjik was driven into autism by
the Hyperosmic Plague. George kept him alive somehow for six weeks until
a Musky got him while George was out foraging. He returned in time to
kill the Musky with a cutting torch."

"So George isn't disposed to make peace with Muskies. But you say he
wants to punish me for killing Dad. Do you mean he has the same
motivation as Helen " The notion seemed weird unsettling, somehow.

"No, Isham. But when your father first began organizing Fresh Start,
George's sexual orientation caused some controversy. Sarwar learned of
it somehow and argued that George should be driven out as an
`undesirable.' You know George he'd die without projects to boss. Your
father spoke up for him, with considerable fervor, and told Sarwar that
if he ever mentioned George's sexual proclivities again,he would be
asked to leave."

"Oh." Light dawned.

"Yes. With the passing of years, George and Sarwar seem to have buried
the hatchet but I suspect that a bit of the handle is still visible.
George was extremely grateful to Jacob; thanks to you he's now under the
direct authority of a man who, he believes, considers him less than a man."

I felt a flash of pity for George, but it didn't last long.Poor old
fellow has to kill me; howsad for him. I laughed.

"Pretty ironic, doc. One of the most crucial people in human history
blows the big one on account of a taboo that's been dead for twenty
years. Civilization persists in completing its suicide." He didn't seem
to appreciate the humor. "How about Krish "

"Sarwar's case is an altogether subtler one." Gowan studied his
fingernails. "His biochemical knowledge aside, Isham, your father was a
dreamer of magnificent scope but a shockingly undereducated man. His
first big dream resulted in the world we live in today." Well, at least
one person believed me. "Fresh Start was a better dream, but he was no
more equipped to execute it than he was the first time around. Again, he
needed a stooge. He was the dreamer but Sarwar was the planner, the
systems specialist, the design engineer. Tell him you want living
quarters for a hundred-fifty technicians, and he'll devise buildings and
water and sewage systems to your parameters. Tell him you want a
newspaper, and he'll locate presses, form a staff, arrange distribution.
He's a realizer of dreams.

"But he's not a dreamer. Faced with hostile neighbors, it took him to
getGot News and WFS working but it took Jacob to think of them. Sarwar
lacks originality, and his vision is of a unique kind, as limited in its
way as Jacob's. He tends to see the inside, the workings, whereas Jacob
saw the outside, the goal. Without Jacob, Sarwar is a man with his head
cut off. He has no dreams to forge."

"And I cut off his head, and rubbed his nose in the fact that even with
that head, all he ever was was the second Wendell Carlson. Oh, Jesus!"
It all fit now, and the completed jigsaw picture was sickening. What a
tangled concatenation of bullshit for the fate of the race to be decided
by! I began to get angry, a deep anger I didn't entirely understand. "I
felt better thinking they were just stupid and ruthlessly practical.
That's a dumb bunch of reasons to die you just gave me, Dr. Mike. Why,
they're worse than hypocrites. They're they're "

"Human. Just like Jacob was human, lad. Just like you."

"Me " I leaped to my feet, enraged.

Gowan stood his ground. "What other reason did you have for killing
Jacob than personal outrage  Don't tell me you really believe that `Hand
of Man' guff he used to give you  Have you really `slept easier' lately "

My voice was low and dangerous. "That's none of your goddamn business."

"Suffering Jesus, boy, how can you condemn the Council for their
rationalizations when you won't look at your own  All right then, tell
me: whydid you kill Jacob "

"Hey, listen he loaded, cocked, and aimed me. All I did was go off."

"Oh, crap! You're a man, not an artifact; you made a free-will choice.
The cleverness of the method used shows that you applied your reason to
the matter do you seriously claim you're a tool of your conditioning  Is
that why you associate with our enemies and try to sell a peace nobody
wants "

"Shut up." I blazed, startling myself considerably. I don't think I'd
ever said that phrase before in my life. "I don't need this shit! What I
need is someone to help me get through to the Council, not somebody to
tell me they're just as right to kill me as I was to do what they're
killing me for."

"What you need, Isham, is to learn to forgive them and your father. If
you don't, you can't justly forgive yourself and if you can't do that,
you might as well not wait until tomorrow morning to die."

I didn't plan on dying any time in the near future, but I couldn't say
that with Shorty listening he's my friend, but he has a strong sense of
duty. Besides, it was irrelevant. I stood clutching the bars of my cell
with my one hand, and for an awful moment I was back on top of the
Empire State Building, reeling at a great height.It may be necessary,
but is it right  As you sow, so shall you reap. One good burn deserves
the other cheek for an eyehave been used goddammit used by that
sanctimonious . . . I burst into angry tears and sat down hard on the
stone floor.

"Isham, one of the hardest things for a young man to realize and accept
is how many of his father's worst traits he has acquired unconsciously."
Gowan's voice was soft, compassionate. "Perhaps there are valid grounds
for execution perhaps they even obtain in your case. But you killed
Jacob for personal reasons."

"As he would have had me kill Wendell," I muttered into my lap.

"Precisely."

The knot in my gutrefused to loosen. In all the weeks since I had
booby-trapped the bathroom I had, by an effort that only now seemed
remarkable, entirely avoided thinking about the matter at all. Poor
Wendell had accepted the news with no comment at all I don't suppose he
felt qualified to make moral judgments anymore. And so there were no
rationalizations to surrender, no defenses to come tumbling down around
my ears. There was only the pain, the horror and the pain that formed a
molten lump in my belly. It was plenty.

The words clawed themselves up my throat with ragged talons, pried open
my teeth and escaped. "I loved him! I l-loved him. The bastard,
themotherfucker , I loved him. Cold-hearted self-serving madman I
loved him killed him HATE HIM!" I was screaming, beating my thigh with
my hand, stump flailing.

Gowan reached through the bars and captured my hand in his. I'd never
thought of him as a strong man, but his grip was unbreakable. The
painful pressure of his fingers was an input from the world outside my
skull, and I could not break the connection; it anchored me to reality.
All the tension that made my body shiver and spasm seemed to drain off
down my arm and into those clenching fingers. For an endless time I
seemed to be dangling from them over some bottomless abyss, and just as
the pain reached the breaking point it began to ease, until finally I
was only sitting on a hard floor with a wet face and a sore arm.

" `Can any man,' " Gowan quoted softly, " `be asked to be more than a
man ' You did what you had to do, Isham. You were who you were, and are
now someone different in consequence." His voice was somewhat hoarse. I
smelled sweat, glanced up and saw his face beaded with it, his hand
white in my grip. I released it hastily.

He held my eyes, and suddenly he laughed and stood up. "First my window,
then my hand. You've got a blacksmith's grip, friend."

I seemed to be looking up at him out of a well. "I had the ideayou
were holdingme ." I wiped my nose.

"I guess I was, at first."

"I . . . I'm glad you came."

"How do you feel "

I thought about it. "At peace," I said at last, surprised. "First time
in a long while."

"Then I'm glad I came too. I was going to bring you some books, but I
forgot. I'll come back with them tonight. Have you readThe Count of
Monte Cristo  " He winked gently on the side away from Shorty.

It was beautifully done. The sudden chatter sounded natural after the
extreme intensity of the moment past and Shorty is completely illiterate.

"As a matter of fact I already have, yes," I told him, smiling. "I liked
old Valjean he did things for himself."

No, I don't need any help in escaping. 

"I should**say so. Well, do you need anything, then "

"No, thanks. You've given me the only help I needed."

His lean face lost twenty years' worth of tension. "I'm glad, Isham. I'm
glad. You always were one of my brighter pupils. If only you weren't so
utterly undisciplined . . ."

I waved my arm in silent pantomime, mouthed"Avoid the Tool Shed" with
exaggerated clarity.

". . . you might have amounted to something," he continued without
missing a beat, nodding when I finished.

"Not me. I'm going to be a teacher when I grow up," I replied aloud.

He grimaced. "Enough of my pupils are Stoned already, thank you."

I awarded the pun a wince. "As opposed to cap-and-Gowaned " I asked,
then peered at him closely. "Your pupils don't look stoned to me." He
winced right back, and we almost smiled.

"Enough of this chitchat, Isham. I've got Sarwar's ear to bend, and
George's, and especially Helen's. In fact, I believe I'll see her first.
Tomorrow is a long way off. Be of hope."

"I am, Dr. Mike. Thanks for stopping by."

"Be seeing you, lad." He left with his usual jaunty stride, and the
memory of his smile, framed in wispy blond beard, stayed with me longer
than his spoor.

I went to the cell window. It faced on Town Square and the Pond, a
macabre touch. I spent about ten minutes watching children sail small
wooden boats in the shade of the weeping willows, wishing for a good
case of amnesia.

I found myself thinking of Wendell. I was desperately anxious to know if
he still lived. He was an old man; his heart wasn't up to running around
the city, jumping in and out of subway tunnels. But the transmitter
which had been causing me to limp for so many miles had barely enough
range to set off the bomb at the Tool Shed, and no receiving capacity.
There's a limit to how much you can build into a hollow heel, even if
you know what you're doing and have all the resources of New York City
to draw from. There was no way for Wendell to tell me if he lived.

I gave it up and put in an hour's hard thinking on Gowan's words.

 


  CHAPTER ELEVEN

It was the second visitor that surprised me.

I'd just finished a tolerably good Last Meal, and from a strong sense of
tradition as much as from prudence I ate heartily. Being upwind of the
building's front door, I didn't even get spoor warning. I simply looked
up and Alia was there.

A giant punched me under the heart with considerable vim, and the
overseer part of my brain that wanted to slam the cerebrum into high
gear was informed that the cerebrum was not accepting calls at this
time. I rummaged desperately in my bag of wisecracks and grabbed the
first one I found.

"If Shorty's had his dessert, would you ask him to come in " I rolled to
my feet.

"Isham, I . . ."

"Aren't you the heroine who brings the prisoner a Pfeil with a cake in
it  Youcan't be the prison chaplain, and Collaci doesn't wear his
grenades under his shirt like that. I know you're not my lawyer, or they
wouldn't let you see me. Whatare you here for "

"I came to hear a babbling idiot do vaudeville routines," she said dryly.

"Den you in de right place. Fus' dey gimme ten years in Leavenworth. Den
dey gimme 'leven years in Twelveworth. Now I gets five and ten in
Woolworth, and do youknow how much wool worth these days  Say, why
haven't you asked me to shut up by now  It sure is a hell of a note when
you can't even piss people off any. . ."

"Isham, please shut up."

I shut up, and we looked each other over for a hundred years or so. My
first conscious thought was that she looked different somehow, the first
person I had seen who didn't look precisely as they had before I'd left
home to go shorten Wendell. I couldn't nail down the difference, and,
finally controlling my funk, looked closer.

The hair was the same, soft brown wings falling from a center part, worn
just a bit longer than was practical. The line of her jaw was as regally
strong as I remembered it. Same almond eyes, with that improbable tiny
red splotch next to the left pupil and no eyebrows worth mentioning.
Same slender neck, skin the color of coffee extra light disappearing
beneath the familiar blue turtleneck. Powerful shoulders, hands callused
but surprisingly graceful for a blacksmith's, with long spatulate
fingers. Same generous, low-slung breasts, the right still markedly
larger than the left. Same wide hips, soft belly and pouting mound under
the very same patched jeans I had last seen pooled at her feet, four
months ago . . .

I ceased my catalog hastily; a breeze was blowing and I was upwind. And
as my eyes traveled prudently upward, I saw the little things I had
missed, the subtle differences. At the place where waist became hips,
two pads of flesh that I didn't recall distorted the twin curves. The
belly and breasts appeared fuller, more padded. The mouth, for which I
had never found any adjective but "chewable," now had firm things
happening in the corners as if it'd done some chewing of its own. That,
combined with the fact that the almond eyes were bloodshot, made her
overall face subtly older, stronger somehow but in a melancholy way.
There was something about those eyes . . .

"You've changed, Isham."

I snorted. "Yeah. I used to be bilaterally symmetrical."

"Stop it. I don't mean your arm, and I don't mean the changes losing an
arm makes in your face and in the way you carry yourself. I was
expecting them."

"What do you mean, then " Dammit, I was trying, consciously, to make my
voice soft, but the edge just would not come off it.

She lowered her eyes. "I don't know. Forget it."

"Okay. You've changed too."For Christ's sake, say something nice.
"You're getting fat."

She shook her head. "Getting thin. I've lost five pounds in the last two
weeks. I got fat while you were away."

"I must say I'm astonished to see you."

"You are " Her face fell. "Didn't you know I'd "

"Hell, I was surprised they let Dr. Mike in, and your father can
reasonably rely on him to keep his mouth shut. But you "

Her face got up again. "What do you mean  Keep my mouth shut about what "

"Whoa. Back up. Whatdo you know about why I'm here "

A muscle tightened in her jaw. "Papa says you admitted murdering Dr.
Stone. And some foofooraw about collaborating with Muskies."

"He say anything about Carlson "

She paled a little, but her voice was steady. "He says Carlson has
brainwashed or subverted you in some way, that he made you kill your
father."

"Mmm-hmm. And you know my sentence "

"Yes."

"I don't understand it. Krish must be nuts to let you speak with me. He
must know in his heart that I can convince you of the truth in about ten
minutes, and that no power on earth will shut you up. Hecan't let the
true story get out folks might not . . ."

"Isham "

". . . unless yes "

"What makes you think Papa knows I'm here "

I blinked. "But Shorty would never let you back here unless "

" unless I told him that Papa authorized it. So I did."

"Oh."Prison life is making you stupid, old son. "Suppose he'd checked "

"I leaned on him just a little. I told him Papa'd written out the
authorization, and showed him a memo about a crew chiefs' meeting with
Papa's signature on the bottom."

"And Shortybought it "

"He can say he did if anyone ever asks. Who's going to mention it you "

"Shorty's a nice fella. I'm gonna be extra careful not to get him hurt."

Her eyes widened, and I was somehow subtly pleased at the operating
speed of her uptake. Interesting datum, that pleasure.

"Need any help "

I hesitated, and she sensed my distress. "Shorty's stepped out for a
breath of air."

"Shorty is a gentleman and no I don't think I need any help." Her face
once again landed on its face.Dammit, she wants to help.Make
nice need something, for Chrissake. "No, wait if you can occupy Teach'
somehow between, say, midnight and one tonight, without sticking your
neck out "

"It's done."

"And for the love of Carlson, stay away from the Tool Shed!"

"Damn." She grinned. "Dr. Gowan hinted about that. I should have added
two and two." I liked the grin.

"Oh, the doc he is a subtle man." In the same funny way as before, I was
pleased at the questions she wasn't asking.Never rains but it pours,
does it  I was sort of out of things to say; we sat in silence for a
measureless space, whirling thoughts surely hidden behind both sets of
eyes. We were taking each other's measure.

I began to speak, telling her the story she had not yet heard,
recapitulating all the events that had led me to where I was. And as I
spoke, my thoughts kept returning to where I'd been, to the even earlier
events which had led me to the start of the road whose journey I was
recounting.

Specifically the ones having to do with Alia. We have known each other
forever, and shared some intensely traumatic times, good and bad. She
was, for instance, there when Mom was cut down by a Musky on the Lake
shore before our eyes, and we cried together all that day. I was, for
instance, there with her on the day when her mother died by her own
hand, and we both took guilty comfort in having another before whom we
did not have to cry and look sad. We were together much, feeling somehow
closer to each other than to the other children of Fresh Start, whose
fathers were not movers and shapers. And somehow it was not until we
both were fourteen that we first made love.

I understand by Pre-Exodus standards that's shockingly young, and I
guess I believe it. But things are different nowadays in fact, Alia and
I were a trifle backward. By virtue of our parentage, we probably got a
better sexual education than most do these days but only from the
academic standpoint. We were playmates for years before we caught on
thatthose particular scents meantthat .

From there, of course, it is a short step to combining the scents to see
what results. As it happened, it was Dr. Mike who found us, in the woods
east of the Lake, lost in the wonders of scientific inquiry, covered
with mosquito bites and hickeys. He apologized for disturbing us, we
told him that was all right, and he went back to his walk, looking
thoughtful. We too returned to our exercise, and thought no more about
the encounter. But that night we each walked into the windmill back at
our respective homes.

Characteristically, Dad had never given my sexual identity a thought it
was after all right under his nose. Alia's dissimilar plumbing had, on
the other hand, literally rubbed Krish's nose in the matter some years
earlier but he had been too embarrassed to do more than give her a
coldly factual lecture on procreation and genetics that went in one ear
and out the other.

That night, though, both our fathers suddenly discovered a great deal
they had meant to say, all of it intensely personal and personally
intense. I remember Dad's oration very well. He could be pretty Old
Testament when he put his mind to it, and I got both barrels that night.

The basic theme was that a warrior can't afford to go and get himself
entangled with no women at least not until he's discharged his duty.
"With Civilization gone, there just isn't any kind of contraception
left, Isham except self-control!I know you're reaching the age when
girls will seem like the only thing in the world but there's another
thing in the world, and its name is Wendell Carlson, and itmust be
destroyed . If I hadn't had you and your mother to care for, I'd have
gone after Wendell myself long since. I, I nearly did when Barbara died
. . . well. I'm an old man now, son, and our revenge won't wait much
longer. If you think for one minute that you can . . ."

You get the idea. I certainly did by the time Dad had finished pulling
all the stops on the emotional organ, I was sobbing with remorse, and
shaking with fear that Alia and I had already made a baby. I avoided
her, and all women my age, like plague vectors for months thereafter,
practicing my karate and becoming preternaturally adept at masturbation.

I never did learn what Alia's father told her, but I gathered it was
more racial in theme. At any rate, she and Tommy Ostermyer had an
abortion together the next spring (which I wasnot supposed to know
about and never let on I did), and she was thereafter seen in the
company of other young men, all of them white. If this bothered me, I
didn't tell myself about it.

It was, oh,years later that we were next within twenty yards of each
other.

I had actually left Fresh Start on my way to New York City for my
destined meeting with Wendell Carlson, loaded down with good wishes and
bad advice and grim courage and growing terror, and made my first camp
about twenty miles to the south with the onset of evening. I intended to
take my time and arrive fresh and full of beans, and so I went to sleep
soon after supper.

Sometime in the small hours I found myself awake with Musky gun in one
hand and knife in the other. The moon was full, the night crisp and
still. I saw her at once,much closer than she should have been able to
get without waking me. She stood quite still, a few yards from my feet,
and her eyes gleamed unnaturally bright. She was naked, her clothes
pooled at her feet. I had the idea she'd been standing there for some time.

As I stared, unable to shake off the unreality of the moment enough to
speak, she began walking toward me, slowly and with grace. I smelled the
scent of her, pungently female. I felt myself harden in response. I saw
the muscles of her thighs ripple under skin the moonlight had turned to
new meerschaum. I heard the whisper of her feet on soft earth. I tasted
desire, harsh behind my tongue.

The glistening at her eyes spilled over and ran down her cheeks as she
knelt at my feet, but she made no sound. She grabbed the end of my
sleeping bag and pulled, slowly and firmly. As it slid downward I said
something like "Hey." I dropped my weapons, but did not grab the
sleeping bag. She tossed it carelessly into the darkness, breasts
jiggling, and sat on her heels staring up the length of my body. Her
lower lip hung slack and her head seemed too heavy for her neck to
support; my head swam with the scent of her. The ground was cold beneath me.

I spoke her name, a dry croak around a leather tongue. She almost smiled.

"They can't say I kept you from going, now," she whispered huskily. "And
you might not be back."

And all at once she swarmed up my body and sealed my mouth with her
tongue, and she was warm and wet and urgent. She rode me like a
succubus, demanding and insistent, the way men take women in all the
books, her own climaxes coming in clusters as she rocked on my groin.
White heat boiled my brain and ecstasy nailed me to the ground. I
spasmed, screamed, spasmed, arching back lifting us both from the earth,
clutching fingers prying at her shoulder blades. And fell, boneless like
a Jell-O man, through an endless sea of black molasses, gasping for air.

The second time was slower, longer, much more tender, and infinitely
sweeter, the first truly profound thing I had ever known. The crashing
chord of its resolution blended indistinguishably into total sleep
without ever permitting even momentary return of conscious thought.

And in the morning she was gone, and the road was before me.

* * *

I told her of that road now, and where it had led me. I sat within a
stone cube in my own home town, and through the bars I told her of Dad
and Wendell and Muskies and of the strange place that was New York, of
the hate and guilt and madness that went back twenty years, that had
made the world we lived in. I found to my surprise that I was telling
her a different story than the one I had given the Council. Instead of
talking of interspecies conflict and the precious hope of peace that lay
within our grasp, I spoke of the gentle, calm, yet
inexplicablydifferent nature of the Muskies I had met, of the soft
inquisitive touch of them in my mind. Instead of dwelling on the rage
and hate that had led me to booby-trap the bathroom, I spoke of Wendell,
of his contradictions and paradoxes and his strange, funny blend of
incompetence and wisdom. Instead of bitterly attacking her father and
the Council and Dad and Collaci, I found myself speaking of a dead
Persian tom and a decrepit leopard. There was something I was trying to
tell her, a message I recognized only subliminally. It would not even
jell in my mind as "what I would say to her if I had the guts" or
anything like that I just kept on talking and talking and hoping that
somewhere between the lines I was saying what I wanted to. I stared at
the floor as I spoke, and wondered what my spoor was telling her. I
wished I could read hers.

She absorbed the story in silence, which should have surprised me and
didn't. The story of Dad's treachery must have turned her world-view as
violently upside-down as it had mine like finding out that fresh air
causes cancer. But she made no sign. For my part I was staggered to
discover the new perspective problems can take on simply because a woman
listens to them. I experienced a steadying effect like six quick hits of
reefer, a calming and centering of my energies I had not experienced
since my last talk with the Sirocco Brothers. The confusion and
unacknowledged pain of the last few days stopped being the whirlpool I
was drowning in, became only the situation I had to work with.

Somewhere in there a thing was decided, an agreement was made between
us, unnamed in any of the words I spoke. We both knew it.

At last I was talked out. We sat in silence together, sharing the
stillness, until loud ahem-ing and Shorty's returning footsteps brought
us back to an awareness of our situation.

" 'Bout ten minutes more, Miz Alia. Your father's due at ten-thirty, and
it's almost ten now."

"Thanks, Shorty. You are a good friend." He smiled sadly, shook his head
and left, whistling "Salt Peanuts."

"He sure is," I agreed. "Knew he was downwind, and so he took the
trouble to make noise coming back. Instinctive courtesy."

She nodded. "Your father had that, Isham."

"And Judas was kind to midgets" is what I started to say, but before the
words reached my mouth my anger melted, and what I said was, "Yes, he did."

After a pause, she caught my eyes and said, "My father is partly right,
too, Isham. The Agro situation really is becoming unstable. Public
opinion has been running high against us since your father's death he
was the figurehead for the whole community. People were willing to
accept us eggheads as long as we were governed by a man they liked. They
respect Papa, as a negotiator, but they don't like him. He . . . doesn't
inspire love."

"Do those hayseeds think that all Dad's ideas and ideals died with him 
Don't they still want hot-shot, and safe childbirth, and "

"People have short memories, Isham."

I was unsettled to find myself hotly championing Dad's ideals, but there
it was. "Collaci gave me the broad outlines. What are the specifics "

"Well, the usual, of course: spot raids, handwritten broadsides,
whispering campaigns. But they've opened up some new fronts. They're
getting more confident now.

"First they held a huge meeting, a week after Dr. Stone died. Jordan
spoke, at length. The vicious Technos had done away with your father
because he had finally discovered their conspiracy to enslave everyone
else. He claimed Papa was in radio contact with Wendell Morgan Carlson,
and had been for some time. He repeated the charge that Muskies raid
most near us, while we never get hit. He said that proved we could
control Muskies. He called on every able-bodied man within a hundred
miles to leave his farm and join the `Agro Army,' a group he proposes to
train and lead. In return he promised them food, quarters, protection
for their wives and families and a slice of the pie, though not in so
many words."

"What pie  Those idiots believe they couldconquerFresh Start, andrun
it themselves  "

"That's just what they believe, some of them. Jordan'd be happy just to
keep the hot-shot plant in operation, and maybe the ice-cream maker. He
has no use for the research or agricultural labs, or for the power plant
or the distillery, or even my smithy. Back to nature: muscle power and a
thirty-year life span."

"Look, I know Jordan's a musclehead and his followers suffer from
rectocranial inversion. But did any of our neighborsswallow that bilge "

"The musclehead was smart. He gave an oration that appealed to people's
fear, threw in half-truths and hinted at the other halves anddidn't
call for a show of hands. He thanked everyone for listening and sent
them home.

"A few days later, some of his bravos started going door to door. `Why
aren't you joining, Mr. Jones  Your neighbor Sam Smith is.' Then, when
you've signed him up, trot over to Sam Smith's and use Jones's name to
sign him up. Some of the smaller holdouts got roughed up just a little."

"Christ!"

"Lately, even big suppliers have been having mysterious bad luck. Amos
Lewis's barn happened to catch fire. The Crows Hollow gang couldn't get
their tractor to start one morning and there turned out to be sugar in
the tank. A rockslide on a sunny day almost got Mr. Rosenberg and his son."

"Yeah, Teach' told me about that one. Jordan's getting bold. Maybe too
bold. Is his location known "

"He's still at Salt Mountain, in the old mine. But they say he has
nearly a hundred and fifty with him."

"Whoo-ee. All fighting men "

"Most of them. Isham, it really hurt us when the Muskies got Mr. Hardy.
One of our biggest suppliers, on his way here with a load of rye, and
he's killed a quarter-mile from the Gate. Mrs. Hardy went strange, sent
her four sons off to join Jordan, and burned the homestead flat. Old Man
Barton from across the river came to the Gate the other day, screamed
incoherently for ten minutes, and stumped off home again. People are in
an ugly mood."

"And the true story about what went down in New York wouldn't help much.
I know."

"And Carlson can't and Wendell can't get the Muskies to stop their
attacks and help us "

"Not without help from Fresh Start. Your father isn't inclined to give it."

"I'll talk to him."

"Talk to Dr. Mike first he may help you keep your foot out of your
mouth. He extracted mine pretty smoothly."

"I will. Is there anything else I can do "

"Just what I said. Keep Teach' occupied for an hour or so. Then when you
hear a very loud noise, act surprised. I . . . I'll get back to you as
soon as I can. Maybe not in person for awhile, but . . ."

"Isham "

"Yes "

"Thanks for trusting me."

All of a sudden that uncomfortableness was back between us again,
stronger than ever. I didn't know why. "Why shouldn't I  You once gave
me the best going-away present I ever got."

"You too."

"Eh "

"Never mind. You've got things to do, and so do I. Time I got to them."

I found I was reluctant to let her go. "How're things at the smithy "

"Busy. The bellows busted and I got backed up, and then my damnfool
apprentice ran off and married a chemist. But I've got a new helper now,
the Taylor boy. I think he'll work out; he can pound sand. I. . . . I'd
like to meet Wendell some day. He sounds like a very nice man."

"He is. I hope you get the chance real soon, Alia. I hope he's still al "

And I stopped speaking, just shut up like a broken tape. The wind had
suddenly backed, uncharacteristically for that time of day, and I found
myself dumbstruck. Alia sensed it at the same instant I did, tried
briefly and without success to keep her features straight. She swore
bitterly and burst into tears.

"Damn, damn, damn, shit. I didn't mean for you to know."

I was cunningly constructed of corn flakes and stale glue. The steering
was out and the brakes wouldn't work. The only slug left was jammed in
the firing chamber. The last step wasn't there. I had swallowed a giant
ice cube and my stomach was shrinking around it. "When are you due 
Asshole question number one; March, isn't it  Ithought you were
getting fat."

Dr. Mike's pedagogical voice sounded distantly in my ears."The
distinctive, identifiably feminine scent of woman arises in large part
from glandular changes based on the ovulation cycle . . ."  

She was actually wringing her hands, a gesture I'd read of but never
really seen. "I thought if I came after supper, the wind would stay hard
north."

"This time of year it was a good bet. There you go."

There seemed only so long I could avoid making some kind of statement,
somedeclaration of where I was at. Where the hell was I Teach' is
right. Sometimes it seems they just keep a-comin' at you. 

I didn't know the half of it.

"Isham, I don't . . . you can't . . . I won't have you . . . " She
couldn't get it out, and I wanted to interrupt her so she wouldn't have
to, and I didn't know what to say, and prayed for a distraction of any
kind at all, and instantly there was a sound like the trump of doom
heard from arm's length.Thank you. The floor danced and Alia screamed.

 


  CHAPTER TWELVE

My second thought was that the charge I'd planted at the Tool Shed had
gone off prematurely, but as I hit the floor I realized the three
discrepancies. The blast was entirely too loud, by a factor of five; it
was too far away; and it came from the north.North  What the fuck is
north   

But myfirst thought, before I went down, was to poke my leg through
the bars and kick Alia's feet out from under her. I didn't know enough
about her reflexes to depend on a shout. We landed roughly
simultaneously, and she did it damned well.

Shorty came in the door at a remarkable speed for a man of his mass,
grabbing a Garand and diving behind the desk. The spoor of the blast
said mortarfire.Mortars   

"Aw,shit, Isham!" Shorty yelled reproachfully.

"Not my doing, Shorty. Watch your ass."

"Worse and worse. Want me to fetch you a gun "

"Wait a minute, I'll come get it." I retrieved the pick from my afro and
reached up to the lock, keeping as much of me as possible on the floor.
Gunfire had been coming from the north since the moment of the
explosion, and by now the stink of cordite had reached us.
People-killing iron. Alia kept her mouth shut.

Shorty was waiting with a pistol for me. "Match weapon," I said
appreciatively. "Thanks, pal." It was considerate of him to pick
something I could fire one-handed.

"You take west and north windows; I'll cover east and the door "

"Solid."

"Some fine turnkey I turn out to be."

Alia had crawled near; she started to rise as I did. "Give me a gun I
can shoot."

"Stay the fuck down, woman!" I bellowed. "You're pregnant."

"Yes, Isham." She dropped back on her precious belly and crawled behind
a file cabinet. Oddly pleased, somehow feeling more dangerous, I looked
around the room.

An alcohol lamp glowed low; the room was alternating butter and
chocolate. Defensive props were at a premium: Alia was behind one and
Shorty was just crawling out from behind the other. The Ashley furnace
near the twin cells was too small to provide effective cover from any
direction. There were six rifles of varying potency racked against the
south wall beside the doorless door, but they had no slings I couldn't
use them. Likewise the big-bore Musky-guns on the other side of the
doorway, even if they'd had the range I wanted.

Shorty was busy underneath the Musky gun-rack. He kept a fair-sized
mirror around so weekend drunks like Marv could repair their appearance
before going home to their wives or husbands, and he was hastily
improvising a stand for it: a good way to cover two directions from one
position. He got it the way he wanted it and began pushing it into the
doorway with the barrel of his Garand. He saw me watching, paused a
moment to grin, and said a very strange thing. He said, "That's a good
woman you got there, pal." Then he went back to his task.

The mirror started to fall, and he risked a quick lunge. His balding
head exploded like an egg and yanked him a full yard into the room,
slamming him against the floor. I suppose there was a noise. Things
splattered. I screamed, an inarticulate wail of fury, and Alia gasped.
The room suddenly smelled of excrement.

Shorty's dying spasm had swept the mirror in my direction I lifted it to
the east window and scanned the rocky slope of the Nose. From the angle
of impact, the shot could have come from nowhere else. I saw him. A
short man with some kind of rifle, crouching behind a boulder. From the
doorway he'd be covered, but I was just that hair to the side: his
silhouette was a textbook target against the moonlit sky.

I had a handgun I'd never used before. Everybody knows you can't hit
anything with a handgun. I was firing uphill, with a corner of my eye.
Everybody knows you can't hit anything firing uphill. It was dark out. I
stuck my right hand through the bars of the window, bent it awkwardly
backward to aim to the right, and shot him dead. I knew he was dead even
before I saw the limp, heavy, bag-of-clothes way he rolled down the
scree slope, landing in a clatter of gravel in the ditch along South
Avenue. I'd known it before I stuck the gun out the window.

I saluted Shorty with the pistol. "I didn't think I believed in
vengeance anymore, Shorty," I told him, "but I'm glad you won't go to
hell alone."

Behind her file cabinet, Alia said nothing.

I used the desk to build me an alcove from which I could cover the door,
and settled down to wait. As an afterthought, I retrieved Shorty's
Garand and laid it across the desktop so that its field of fire
encompassed the window of the cell I had vacated.

More gunfire had been going on during all this, still mostly to the
north, but it got right quiet now. I wondered where Teach' was, and what
he thought of the fireworks in this corner of the world.

"Isham Stone!"

Holy smoke, Jordan himself "Yah."

"Come on out with you hands empty. We get you out of here, get you to
the mountains." It sure sounded like tapes I'd heard of Jordan.

I said something along the lines of "be fruitful and multiply," without
actually implying a partner.

"The Man gon' kill you, boy, where you at  We on your side."

"Then get off of it."

"Crazy muthafucka, you want to die "

"Looking forward to it, ugly man."

There was a silence; when he spoke again his voice was dark with
anger.Jordan, all right. "We c'n roll grenades through that door all
day,father-killer . I want your ass, an' I want it now."

Why the hell "Roll away." I thought I was being canny it seemed
obvious that whatever he wanted my ass for, it wasn't hamburger. He
wasn't about to get gay with grenades.

So my heart nearly stopped when a pineapple-sized object sailed through
the door frame. I leaped on it to smother the blast, instinctively, and
that was my undoing. For instead of a grenade, Jordan had hurled a much
more ancient and childish weapon.

A stink bomb.

It burst beneath me. The smell tore my nose like a dozen immense
fishhooks of varying sharpnesses. It brought the shock-paralysis of any
sensory overload, the same piteous mewing and spastic clutching you see
in a man who's stared at magnesium combustion or stuck his head in the
fire-horn. I didn't even wish for my plugs it was far too late. I wished
for oblivion, and was heard.Thanks again.  

* * *

I came back to something like consciousness to find the world
upside-down. Slowly I realized I was slung over a broad, anonymous
shoulder, being carried at a dogtrot. I was breathing in great spasmodic
gulps, and I hadn't the strength to do anything else. I decided my
respiratory system had gone on strike under intense pressure from the
olfactory center, and was now working overtime to fill the backlog of
orders. The worst of the stink was past.

I was vaguely aware that Alia was near, looking right-side-up and
therefore being carried like me. She was unconscious. Light-headed and
foolish, I tried to tell her captor to watch out for our baby, but I
couldn't get air allocated for the purpose.Who's in charge here  I
wondered, and what a question that was.

A flat, sharp voice came from the right Collaci's, of course. "You die
first, Jordan."

The man carrying me froze, as did all I could see. To give them credit,
none tried to dive for cover. It would probably have been fatal.

"The Stone boy die second, pig." Jordan's voice held no fear, but there
was anger. I noted vaguely that he smelled a lot like Collaci.

Teach' chuckled. "I class him as pretty expendable."Hmmph. Through my
fog I was vaguely annoyed.

"Maybe the new boss-man's daughter take his place, then."

"Fine. Then I won't have to aim this Browning so careful."

Jordan was plainly discomfited this script wasn't following the expected
pattern. And a Browning is a hell of a lot of gun. He growled deep in
his chest.

"That's the trouble with hostages," Collaci remarked conversationally.
"They're like flashbulbs use 'em once and they're gone. I'd rather have
her on my conscience than hanging over my head. Next time the stakes
might be higher."

"Then why ain't you shootin' "

"Let her go and you can walk. With him, if you want him. You know my
word is good."

"White man's word," Jordan spat, but he sounded tempted. He should have
been it was a good deal. But as he was deciding . . .

"No, Collaci!" came a breathless shout that could only have been
Krishnamurti. "Let them go!"

Jordan's voice swelled with triumph. "That smell like the new boss-man,
pig. I guess we walk after all."

There was a long pause, and then Collaci sighed disgustedly. "I guess
you do."

Throughout all this I had been listening with imperfect attention and no
sense of personal involvement. It had been a day so full of changes that
my mind was numb. Since breakfast I had (a) been interrogated, (b) been
condemned to death, (c) lost weeks of peachy rationalizations about
Dad's murder, (d) discovered I loved Alia, (e) discovered Alia loved me,
(f) discovered Alia was pregnant, (g) seen a good friend's brains
splattered on the floor, and (h) taken a stink bomb at close range. An
overloaded brain seized on the last of these as a perfect excuse to
retreat from reality, into a warm, dark, safe place altogether to be
preferred. Being head-down probably didn't help either.

At a command from Jordan, the man carrying me began jogging again. This
made things hurt, and I decided to retreat that last little bit. I
turned out the lights behind me and left the world.

* * *

It all got sorted out somehow while I slept. I woke clear-headed and
alert, cataloging bruises and contusions before I opened my eyes. When I
did, they were little help it appeared to be midnight in the coal
cellar. Alia was near. Save for her, my nose said it was an empty coal
cellar, in which used sweatsocks, diapers and sanitary napkins had been
stored for the last forty years. My ears, when I moved, said it was a
cave. Except for the shoes, the clothes I wore were not my own.

I was ravenously hungry.

I don't know if you've ever been in a cave. Your eyes just don't
adjust it staysdark . I used thrown pebbles to define the size and
shape of the place walking around seemed entirely too much trouble. It
was about the size of Gowan's study, shaped (and scented) like a wedge
of limburger, with a roughly ten-foot ceiling. There appeared to be an
exit tunnel at one corner, and I didn't smell a guard. But with the
background stench, that wasn't too surprising I assumed there was one
out there somewhere.

Alia began making waking-up noises a few feet to my left, and I
surprised myself a bit by dropping my survey of the tactical situation
and rolling over at once to throw an arm over her. I didn't want her to
wake alone in a strange place.

It didn't seem to help much as soon as she came fully awake, she began
to sob quietly. I found myself completely at a loss, so I tightened my
grip and held on. "Cry it out, baby," I heard myself whisper, "Cry for
me, too." I guess she did; it lasted awhile. It came to me during that
time that spinning helplessly in a maelstrom is not as bad if someone
else is spinning with you. It was a new and profoundly interesting
thought, to me, and I took time to taste its fullness.You're not just
you anymore. Perhaps you never should have been.  

With the end of tears came the beginning of desire, and we made love
with the quiet, purposeful intensity of people in bomb shelters, sinking
ships and cul-de-sacs before us. It was, as has been noted, a way of
telling Death to get fucked, a desperate and defiant affirmation of
living. It made an enormous difference somehow that there was already a
baby planted and growing in that womb we felt its presence, and welcomed it.

"One of the startlingly many nice things about being dextrous as opposed
to ambidextrous" I said a long time later "is that you can lie on your
side holding your lady without your left arm going to sleep."

She snorted and made a face (which I knew in the dark only because our
faces were touching). "But you won't be much help changing the baby."

"Gee whiz, that's a shame."

"That's all right," she decided. "I'll rig a clamp over the toilet for
the dirty diapers, and let you scrape them off into the bowl. I don't
want you to feel left out."

"Gosh, hon, you're a brick. Still, if I'm going to be in a partnership,
I don't guess I want to be any more than an equal partner, at that. If
it's all right, though, I'll leave nursing to you."

Alia nodded, and we both rose into sitting position by unspoken
agreement (another one, that is). "How do you feel " I asked.

"Oh." Her hands left my shoulders. "I wish you hadn't asked me that."
Her voice was odd.

"Eh " She was gone. From a far corner came the sound of retching. "Oh,
my god! Morning sickness." I wanted to laugh, but nothing much struck me
funny. "Can I help " She managed to convey a negative, which left me
feeling even more helpless.

Then I began thinking about the few times I had ever been nauseous and
alone, with no one to hold my head while I vomited, and scuttled across
the rock floor to her side. She protested weakly, but gave in so quickly
I knew I had chosen rightly.

So then I started thinking about just how few times Ihad ever been
nauseous and alone. It came to me all of a sudden that although Dad had
never given me a lot of emotional support (my memory banks claimed
"none"), still one way or another throughout my childhood he had always
been right there when I reallyneeded him even in emotional matters.
For the second time in a couple of months I flashed on the day I'd
watched a chicken being slaughtered and, remembering Izzy's death
struggles, freaked out. Although Dad had never in his life cared for
touching or being touched, when I woke from my coma it was to find
myself in his arms. And hehad made a point of bringing me back to the
same farm to witness another hen's death, so that I could learn the
difference between that and my memory-trauma.Change the records. The
accused has been found innocent of one count of the charges against him.
Posthumously.  

That did strike me as funny, but laughter didn't seem appropriate. To
cover my confusion I went back to my assessment of strategic
considerations mildly startled at how long it had been since I'd given
them a thought while a part of my mind kept stroking Alia's forehead and
brushing the hair back from her face.

I took a quick inventory of my assets. I had (a) a pregnant woman, (b) a
radio transmitter in my right heel which ought to set off any
radio-detonated explosives that happened to be on the right frequency
for two miles in any direction with no warranty, (c) a collection of
peachy lock-picks, in case I ran across a lock, (d) teeth, (e) toenails,
(f) one fist, and (g) the strength of ten because my heart was pure. My
nose plugs were gone, and my coil lighter was probably with the rest of
my clothes wherever they were.

As an afterthought, I struck (g) from the list.

I went over it again, looking for components with which I could build a
death ray and a flashlight, and found slim pickin's. I had neither the
tools nor the equipment to either boost the transmitter's range or alter
its frequency (so that increased range might accomplish anything more
useful than blowing the loading dock off the Tool Shed back home). For
that matter, I wasn't sure the thing was still in working
order.Something had been rattling faintly as I walked on it for the
last twenty-odd miles, making me limp so theatrically. Nor had I been
anxious to make the only test possible.

Alia's spasms had subsided while I pondered, the sour reek hanging
almost motionless in the air and expanding slowly to fill the available
space. We both returned to the spot where we had made love and reclaimed
our borrowed clothes, dressing in silence.

"Say, Alia "

"Yes, Isham "

"Will you marry me "Some agreements ought to be spoken. 

"Yes, Isham."

Well at least that's one thing settled. You're just a romantic at
heart.There was silence again for awhile.

"What are you thinking about Isham "

"Wondering."

"About what "

I sighed, and came all the way back from my thoughts. "Oh, about where
I'm going to get you pickles and ice cream. Where Wendell is, and what
progress he's made getting through to the High Muskies. Where Dad is
these days, and how soon I'll be joining him. Where I am."

"I can answer the last one. We're in Agro Headquarters the old abandoned
mine-cave network at Salt Mountain. About twelve miles from home."

"I know that isn't what I meant."

"Oh."

"But you raise an interesting point. I believe we're the first Technos
Jordan has ever invited home. I hope we're invited for dinner. I'd clean
up afterward and do the dishes. I'd even put on a tux and wash my hand.
Say, did you ever try to wash one hand  Easier to clap."

"Isham . . . you don't have to wisecrack to keep my morale up."

"I know that. It'smy morale I was thinking of."

"Oh again. Well, I've got a better morale builder than silly cracks."

In spite of the distraction her feathery fingers began to produce in my
trousers, I was about to make a terrible pun in reply when my nostrils
flared. I rose to a crouch, back hairs bristling. There was a ghost in
the coal cellar.

The ghost-glow brightened gradually, solidified, became the lantern-lit
far wall of the tunnel that curved away to the right from the exit.
Footsteps and spoor arrived roughly simultaneously: Jordan and two
others.Plug-uglies seem to come in pairs. Must be a unionregulation
for spear-carriers. These two gave off the attack-pheromones of angry,
frightened bumblebees, a faint acrid smell. But Jordan literally exuded
confidence. His spoor again reminded me of Collaci, and, not being dazed
this time, I was disturbed. He was a dangerous opponent. At the same
time I was eager to see him in the flesh, to see for myself if all the
stories were true. "Let me do the talking, hon," I whispered, and she
nodded. (I spared a second to enjoy having light to see her by again.)

I didn't bother with
stand-beside-the-doorway-and-clobber-them-as-they-step-through routines.
For one thing, such gambits don't work so well against three people. For
another, if Alia and I weren't both in plain sight when they arrived,
Jordan could simply throw rotten eggs through the entrance until I
capitulated.

Sure enough, he had one in his hand when he appeared. He pocketed it
when he saw me and stepped into my parlor. The two goons that followed
him carried enough ordnance to make my corpse weigh twice what it did at
the moment, but I had the notion that he'd only brought them along out
of respect for tradition, or that union reg.

Jordan Washington was purely the most impressive man I have ever seen in
my life.

He was gigantic, just impossibly tall and broad, like something out of
one of Dr. Mike's lovingly preserved comic books. You could have hung a
saddle over each massive shoulder without impeding his arms. Those arms
looked like legs, and his legs looked like fifty-year oak. He moved all
this with a whiplike speed and precision that made me wonder if he ate
coal and drank kerosene. He made Shorty look like a dwarf. In the harsh
lantern light he looked coal-black; his skin was at least three shades
darker than mine. His head was shaved bald. He wore handmade black
leather boots, extremely baggy pants, and a handmade white tunic. He
looked like a sultan, and the long knife at his hip (his left hip, my
tactical computer noted) supported the image.

But the single most striking feature, aside from his sheer bulk, was the
wide white mask that fell from the bridge of his nose, obscuring his
entire lower face.

I'd heard it described, of course but it had an impact that words won't
carry. There was a deep horizontal indentation in the nose for the upper
edge of it, for one thing gruesome hint of the horrors beneath. It was
pure, dazzling white for another, in stark contrast with the skin of his
forehead and throat. Another part of the impact had to do with the fact
that I customarily watch people's mouths more than their eyes. I find a
mouth much more expressive of inner emotion than eyes are said to be in
books to be confronted with an antagonist whose mouth I couldn't see was
somehow uniquely disturbing.

But these things were trimmings. The real impact of the mask was that it
said the twisted ruin underneath was so horrible that it could not even
be made worse by covering it up.

Jordan was a Faceless One.

His eyes were wry and wise, vastly amused by something. I tried to look
as though I shared the joke, but I don't think I pulled it off. Although
you usually don't notice your own spoor, I was aware that I smelled
battle-ready and afraid. When you're keyed up enough to betray it in
your spoor, you're in trouble. When you betray it enough to notice it
yourself, you're in bad trouble. I ordered my medulla to calm down and
start regularizing my breathing, and both the fear and its efluvium
began to subside.

"Hello, Isham," he said, in a deep baritone that no other chest could
have produced.

I showed him my wisdom teeth. "Howdy don't."

"My, my." He shook his great head. "My, my. Lots of confusion in my
mind, son. Got me puzzlin' for sure. They say you off your daddy, an' I
say whee, we got us a brother in the smelly place. Then they say you get
busted, get dragged back from the graveyard to get shot, an' I say
woo-ee, gotta go spring my man from the smelly place. Then I come to
the smelly place, an' you burn my friend Sylvester while he tryin' to
set you free. Make me use a stink bomb on you, when I was lookin' to be
your friend. You know all of us had to burn our clothes  Yours too.
Where's that at "

"I thought you were someone I owe money to."

"Why you kill your daddy "

"He snored."

"Pretty heavy way to kill a man. Hear tell he looked like me when they
buried him only all over. Closed coffin."

"What '' 

"That chlorine gas, it's a mean mother. Eat skin like boilin' water on a
snowman."

I'd known that chlorine gas was deadly poison, and how to produce it,
but I hadn't known that.Dad always said your education was incomplete.
I felt sick to my stomach. "He snored loud."

Jordan shook his massive head and chuckled indulgently. "Well, you had
your reasons, I expect. Like to've offed that man myself he was the
whitest nigger I ever saw. What I wonder, what is it youreally don't
want to tell me "

"Say what " Hecouldn'tsuspect could he 

"I ask you a little thing, and you got nothin' to say. I think you got a
big somethin' you don't want to talk about, an' you jus' gettin' in
training. Somethin' about your eyes say so. You evade all my questions,
I don't notice which particular questions you evade."

What a canny son of a bitch. As a wolf senses a trap, he had sensed that
I was holding out on him which told him the terribly damaging fact that
I had something to hold out on him. The Council hadn't been that bright;
they'd thought I'd told them the whole truth. My fear-sweat came
back which was all the proof he needed.Shit!  

"Yeah, you a boy with a secret, all right. Somethin' big. Damn big. Got
something to do with the sky devils; hear you talk with them fuckers."

"Where'd you hear that " Was there . . . ahem . . . a nigger in the
woodpile  How had he learned that chlorine gas killed dad 

He ignored the question. "So let's play poker, boy. I got all the
aces but I'm a reasonable man." His eyes smiled. "Tell me somethin' heavy."

So I tried a couple of lies, and they didn't work worth shit, and after
a while I tried half-truths and they worked half a shit, and when Jordan
inevitably got around to pointing out that the white lady smelled to be
pregnant and pregnant ladies often have accidents, and my bluff of
disinterest about that didn't work, I finally got around to telling him
the truth. Not the whole truth but he got as much as I'd given the
Council, which was a lot. A damn lot. I felt like a rabbit conversing
with a snake, off-balance and scared, and sorely hampered by the
presence of my mate.

But it took him so long to get that much (even after he had given his
word to let Alia go in exchange), and my reluctance was so obviously
genuine, that he decided he had the whole package at which I was very
careful to feel no relief; that tricky bastard would have smelled it.

It was not hard to project dismay. The story of Dad's treachery was just
the P.R. angle Jordan needed to drive a final wedge between Fresh Start
and the surrounding community, if not the world at large. Oh, I could
refuse to corroborate the story publicly, and it's hard to force a man
to be a good material witness against his will but all he had to do was
demand a public exhumation to see whether Dad had died with adenoids in
his head. I wished I hadn't been such a clever murderer.

But I had go give Jordansomething , something I could plausibly be
very reluctant to tell him. The only other secret I had on me was too
dangerous to tellanyone , just at this point in history.

And so I gave him Dad.

He was gleefully triumphant. "I knew it! I knew that nigger was a liar!
Whoo Lord, but I never figured him for that much of a liar. Set the
whole thing up to make himself a big frog in a small puddle, an' his
karma came back on him. Lord, lordy-lord, I am avenged!" He rocked
with gargantuan laughter that beat at the walls of the small cave, and
his plug-uglies grinned with him.

I was salty; I'd been psychically outgunned before my woman, maneuvered
into disclosing more than I'd wanted to, and it rankled. "Look, Jordan,
you came to us looking for work. We put you to work at an honest wage.
You volunteered for plugged work, for the high pay, and your number came
up. My father didn't blow off your face you did."

I didn't see the fist coming. It felt like a home-run clout from an oar,
and it lifted me clean off my feet. Being shy one wing loused up my
aerodynamic stability and I landed badly, cracking the back of my head.
The ceiling peeled off the cave and the stars fell in on us. Alia
screamed, and there was the sound of a scuffle that didn't last
long.Steady, boy. She's all right.  

"Don't you ever talk about my features again,boy ." There was a
curious emphasis on the last word that I didn't understand. "What
happened to me was my karma, for associatin' myself with them
nature-killin' Technos! I'm straight with Pan now, and I don't take no
shit from no Fresh Start Stone boy. I reaped what I sowed an' now I'm
gonna plow the mothafuckaunder! "

I blinked up at three of him, decided to deal with the one in the
middle. "You really believe all that Pan stuff, don't you "

His voice and manner changed dramatically. He squatted down and sat
before me in lotus. "Isham, what do you know about Pan "

Something in his eyes made me answer honestly. "Not a lot. Life Force,
isn't he "

"Pan be the force behind all that lives, yes," Jordan said quietly. "Pan
be the burstin' of the earth with life, the thing that make a tree come
bustin' up through a sidewalk and the thing that make a kitten struggle.
He the changin' of the seasons, an' the risin' of the tides an' the sap
in the trees. He be nature, Isham, the god our fathers forgot, an' he
live in the soil an' in the sea. He live in the five-acre garden I work
with my own two hands."

I felt the same weirdness I had felt making small talk with Wendell
while planning his assassination, the same lingering aura of unreality.
I was sitting in a hole in the ground with the faceless giant who was my
kidnapperjailer, discussing theology, while my wife squirmed in the
clutches of a lesser gorilla.

"It ain't right for us to turn away from that force, Isham. Plastic an'
concrete an' metal an' glass, they the straitjacket we built for Pan,
the thing we pave him over with. Man try to be god, he do a damn poor
job. Them things you people make in the smelly place, they ain't natural."

"It ain't natural to take aspirin, but I wish I had some right now."

"Hell it ain't. Ever hear of sassafras  Grow right up out of the ground,
an' the tea you make from it cure any headache in the world. That
tek-knowledge-y shit make it so any weak ignorant idiot can survive,
life-stuff Pan woulda scrapped an' started over. Ever since they turned
their back on Pan, people been gettin' weaker an' weaker, leanin' on
their false god, their tek-knowledge-y."

"So we go back to stone axes and handsaws "

"Damn right. Indians was hip to Pan before the white man come, livin' in
balance with the world. Then come Mister Charlie with pop'lation
explosion an' atom bombs an' seas of concrete. Gotta get back in
planetary rhythm, gotta put our faith in Pan. Tek-knowledge-y mean
cities, an'ever body know where they was at."

I couldn't answer that. I couldn't answer anything he said; my thoughts
had that soap-slippery elusiveness that talking theology always gives
them. Then I saw a hole in his logic.

"Are Muskies part of Pan, too, Jordan "

"I wondered about that considerable, for many many years,'' he said
slowly. "Seemed like they was an' it seemed like they wasn't. But you
give me the answer tonight. Sky-devils feed off of what you do in the
smelly place, so they anti-Pan. Sky-devils be the force of anti-nature
itself, grown so evil it poisonin' itself. What you people call entropy.
They the proof that science be no friend to us they Satan chewin' his
own leg in frustration. They'll go when the smelly place go."

"So where's the consistency  You don't want anything to do with Fresh
Start but you buy our Musky-killing ammo through middlemen, and use it
in weapons that are a far cry from stone axes."

"Self-preservation, boy. When you fightin' evil itself, you use its own
weapons if you can. Day comin', won't need nothin' from you. Then we can
lay down our guns an' go back to tillin' the soil."

"By hand."

"Boy, I lived in New York City when there was such a place, an' I'd
rather break my back in the fields than see that evil come again."

"It's not just your own back that you're proposing to break."

He flared up. "I'm sick of talkin' to you. You talk like a white boy,
like your daddy." He stood up angrily. "I thought maybe you could see
his evil but you shot through with it yourself. I think you need a
little meditation, a little time to open up so Pan can come into your
soul and give you guidance. In fact, just to help you, I gonna arrange a
little fast for you." I gasped in dismay; I was starving. "Say a week."
He turned to the guard who was not holding Alia. "See that they get
water nothin' else." The guard grinned. Jordan turned to go, and the two
gorillas watched me for a false move, the second one releasing Alia to
free his hands.

I didn't feel much like moving at all, especially if the raging hunger
in me was not to be sated for a week. But I had some unfinished business
to transact. "Jordan." I stood up.

He turned back. "What "

"What about Alia  You gave your word to let her go if I spilled my guts."

He paused a moment in thought, nodded briefly. "I'll think about it."

"Thinkabout it " I snapped. "I thought you were a man of honor." It
was a risky thing to say with witnesses present, but it didn't faze him
at all.

"Boy," he said, eyes twinkling above his ghastly mask, "What I am, I'm
apractical man. End justify the means."

"Feed her, Jordan. Or there'll be death between you and me." He saw my
eyes then, and his stopped twinkling.

"I'll do what I'll do," he said curtly, and left.

 


  CHAPTER THIRTEEN

I didn't know whether Jordan sincerely believed that we could be
converted to Pan worship; or whether he had some planned P.R. purpose
for hanging on to us, or whether he was just keeping us on ice. To tell
the truth I didn't especially care. I was about at the end of my
psychological rope: just too many traumatic things had happened to me in
too short a time. I told myself that Jordan had had me over a barrel by
possessing Alia as a hostage, but I was nonetheless filled with bitter
shame and chagrin at the way he had opened me up like a clam. I could
have reminded myself that Jordan was a much older, more experienced man
whose particular genius lay in the ability to manipulate people into
serving his ends. But instead I allowed myself to be demoralized. I was
feeling my calendar age, the confidence of pseudomaturity gone, feeling
adolescent for the first time since I'd been fifteen.

My only consolation was that I hadn't spilled that last secret which
would have made utterly certain Jordan's victory in the battle for the
hearts and minds of surviving mankind. But almost, I wished I had told
that secret to the Council. I had decided correctly, I still
believed that they would use the knowledge for the wrong ends just as
surely as Jordan would. But possessing it might have evened the odds in
the coming crisis in their ideological struggle with Jordan.

Crying over spilt milk, yeah: I did a lot of that during my first day of
fasting. About the only thing I did that didn't fall under that heading
was futile I tried to escape. There was no guard immediately outside the
exit from our prison-cave, and the tunnel beyond it was mighty dark. I
figured I would see a guard silhouetted by light behind him better than
he could see me, and tried tip-toeing out into the tunnel. The darkness
covered sight, and extreme care covered sound, but there was nothing I
could do about smell. Before I'd gotten ten yards up the passageway a
bullet came spanging around the gentle curve of the tunnel from the
darkness ahead, whined past my ear like an angry bee and went through a
really amazing number of ricochets inside the cave where Alia waited
before spending itself.

I followed it, in a similar hurry. Alia was shaken but unhurt.

That was my only quote constructive act unquote. After water had been
fetched for us by a grinning Agro, Alia and I spent the rest of that
first day sitting together in silence and thinking about soyburgers and
hamburgers and ham with brown sugar and pineapple gravy and mashed
potatoes with butter and carrots and rice and turnips and parsnips and
buckwheat and lentils and cabbage and steak and onions oh god,
onions and apple pie and chili and milk and beer and garlic and honey
and ice cream and beets and corn and pancakes and eggs fried in bacon
grease and drip coffee and squash and peppers and cheese and trout in
lemon sauce and bananas and chocolate and peanut butter and strawberries
and peas and stringbeans and cauliflower and lettuce and molasses and
broccoli and celery and radishes and tomatoes and spinach and tofu and
popcorn and bread and chapatis and cornbread and beans and raisins and
peanuts and cashews and walnuts and almonds and peaches and pears and
plums and grapes and cherries and wild raspberries and blueberries and a
big heaping steaming bowl of oatmeal with maple syrup. We made love
repeatedly that night, but sating one hunger only stoked the other.

On the morning of the second day (according to our biological clocks)
even thinking about food was intolerable, so we talked. I told her more
about Wendell, and a lot about what had happened to me during those
years she and I had been keeping out of touch. She told me of her own
experiences during those years (including the straight of what had
happened with Tommy Ostermyer), and we spoke, as lovers will, of what
fools we had been to wait so long.

"Isham," she said suddenly, "there's something on your mind that you
aren't talking about something you didn't tell Jordan."

I said a filthy word with considerable volume. "Good old Isham Stone! If
he's not around to tell a secret to, you can always make it into a
musical and take it on the road. Thirty-six point Times Roman lettering
across my forehead.Fuck!"  

She moved closer and put a hand to my cheek. "You're wrong, Isham.
There's nothing written on your poker face anyway, with your complexion,
it'd have to be written in chalk. What Jordan read was the handwriting
on the wall, there for all to see. What I read is the writing on your
heart which only I can see. You needn't tell me your secret."

"I don't see why not. Pan never created hidden microphones, as far as I
know, and nobody's in smell." I was considerably mollified, and I needed
to share my burden. "It's a secret I didn't dare tell your father or the
Council, the most potentially destructive piece of information I know,
and I can say it in three words:

"Muskies are plasmoids."

She made a puzzled noise. "I don't understand."

"Hmmm. Look, do you know about the four states of matter "

"Four  I thought there were three."

"And here I thought Dr. Mike was giving you kids an education. Okay. For
centuries it was thought that there were only three states of matter:
solid, liquid and gas.

"Then about twenty or thirty years ago, someone remembered the silly
superstition of the ancients, who spoke of earth, air, waterand fire .
Fire doesn't fit under the heading of solid, liquid or gas it's a fourth
thing: a plasma. So is ball lightning. Plasmas are ionized gases . . .
you savvy `ionized'  Good. It was the understanding of the existence of
plasmas that made those last exploratory efforts with fusion power
possible, just before physics went to hell with the rest of the world.
Because plasmas have certain qualities that gases don't have. One of
them is that they can be affected by electromagnetic fields. For fusion
reaction you need such uniformly hellish temperatures that you can't let
the target matter contact the walls of a container heat loss at the
fringes kills the reaction. So you use a plasma, and suspend it within
an electromagnetic field, to oversimplify it enormously.

"Well, Muskies are plasmoids masses of ionized gas held together by a
self-generated magnetic bottle."

"Then Muskies can be affected by electromagnetic fields " Alia
interrupted. "That's why you couldn't tell Papa and the Council because
you were afraid they'd use EM as a weapon against the Muskies "

"Close, but no cigar. Right now, using hot-shot, you can kill a Musky
that's at the limit of your olfactory detection range EM alone wouldn't
make that much difference. But the reason I couldn't tell the Council
about Wendell's attempts to contact High Muskies with EM, the reason I
concocted that ridiculous scheme about building a balloon, was that I
didn't dare let them suspect that Muskies are plasmas rather than gases,
didn't dare let the concept come into their minds. Men have thought of
Muskies as living gas-clouds for years, and it had to stay that way.

"Becauseplasmoids show up on radar." 

She gasped as the implications struck her.

"Plasmoids," I went on, "were one of the phenomena that the Air Force
dug up to explain flying saucers, years and years ago. That theory
differed from weather balloons and thermal inversions and such only in
that it was correct. It simply never occurred to the Air Force that the
plasmoids were sentient."

"Oh, lord," she whispered. "That increases detection range from a couple
of hundred yards of smell to . . ."

"Miles, baby. Lots of miles. If the Council learned that, in its present
state of mind, there'd be such a Musky pogrom as would likely make peace
forever impossible. Conceivably the Musky race could be
exterminated Wendell thinks EM of the right type and frequency will
disrupt a Musky quicker'n hot-shot. Radar-aimed, that'd be pretty
unbeatable."

"But . . . but . . . Isham, my mind is spinning, but . . . why mustn't
you let Jordan find out  He's fanatically opposed to any kind of
technology. He knows nothing about how to reactivate radar, or run it if
he did."

"He's a `practical man,' " I quoted. "He'd learn. That knife at his hip
was Sheffield steel, and that carbine that blew off Shorty's scalp was
government issue. He's willing to compromise to an extent he thinks it's
only for the time being."

"But how could he learn something so complex "

"There are quite a few military installations and airports within
walking distance, andlots of libraries, public and private. If
necessary he could kidnap all the Technos he needs. He's got two
already," I added bitterly.

"Then . . ."

"So he becomes the world's most efficient Musky-killer.Then who are
the Saviors of the World: Technos or Agros  Our popularity declines by
an enormous percentage, and the bottom falls out of the hot-shot market.
Bye-bye Fresh Start."

"But Fresh Start hasmuch more to offer the world than just ammunition.
Medicine, commercial power . . ."

"Baby, the man who rids the world of Muskies can name his own price. All
we have to offer folks is brotherly love and convenience. Hate wins
hands down."

"Oh God, Isham, this is terrible. Youmustn't tell Jordan. You . . .
you shouldn't have told me."

I took her by the ear, smiled fondly (and invisibly) and said softly,
"Don't be a jerk. I'd watch you flayed alive with our baby inside you
before I'd spillthis secret and you'd do me the same favor."

I felt her nod. "Yes, I would. Thanks for the second time for trusting me."

I shook my head. "Don't thank me. It's not as if I could help it."

And after a remarkably short transition we were making love again. The
sharing of the secret had brought us even closer than plighting our
troth, and making love was only the symbol. But there was nothing else
about it that was "only" I took most of the remaining skin off my knees,
and didn't notice till hours later.

* * *

The next few days were very disjointed; our emotions went through vast
manic-depressive cycles, that only occasionally coincided. After a time
the manic part stopped happening so much.

The overriding keynote at first, of course, was hunger a hunger such as
neither of us had ever experienced or imagined before. Then we woke from
our third or fourth sleep with the sharp, clear awareness that we
weren't much hungry for anything at all except intellectually. Our
bellies had given up caring whether or not they ever got filled again,
and turned to meditations of their own.

It didn't make me feel much better. I don't know about Alia, but I
passed the silent times I had previously spent daydreaming of food in
mourning. Just mourning, for anything and everything. I mourned my
failure to outsit Jordan. I mourned my failure to get through to the
Council. I mourned my failure to protect my woman and our child. I
mourned my failure to realize my love for her until it was too late. I
mourned my lost arm.

I mourned for my father.

I mourned Wendell's unjust loss of honor and heritage, and the loss of
his only friend me. I mourned the loss of Civilization, which I had
never known, and all it had promised for the future. I mourned the end
of the world, which seemed to me only days or weeks away. I mourned the
inability of man to rise above his own attachments and stupidity. I
mourned the cussedness of fate.

Once I actually howled aloud, beating my fist against the rock floor.
Alia held me and rocked me, but neither of us spoke.

Three more "days" passed in this fashion. Time did not pass; it
tailgated. On the sixth day Alia and I began to see great subtle
interrelations in everything we knew, began to perceive previously
unseen universal patterns and cosmic knowledge which stupefied us by its
sudden obviousness. It seemed that all of a sudden a switch was thrown
and we understood everything that had ever puzzled us about the Universe
and its workings. We babbled joyously of it for awhile, then realized
the inherent folly of speech and fell silent. We achieved satori.

This did not dispel my grief. But it seemed to make it a grander,
subtler thing, the awareness of Cosmic Irony. There was an Olympian
detachment to my perception of the magnificent tragedy that was life.

On the seventh day we began having visions.

* * *

It was in fact while I was in the middle of a stupendous eight-color
four-dimensional hallucination that the situation suddenly changed.

The hallucination in question was a breed of pageant, in which all my
friends and enemies were represented. But the last one through the door
was out of uniform he'd forgotten to wear his body.

It was a Musky, and my nose said it was really there.

The rest of the procession, which had been doing a sort of zero-gravity
snake dance around the cave, faded as though a heavy fog had rolled in.
I rose from lotus, went to the only remaining full five-gallon bucket of
the four Jordan had provided us, and plunged my head into the water. The
Musky was still there when I finished spluttering, so I sat down again
and reached for the undermind. It was very very near.Four's corin'
heaven years and I was under.

I won't go into the exact conversation, as I did with the one I had with
the Sirocco Name. Some of the concept-units we used can't be crammed
into a single English word, so it wouldn't be accurate anyhow.

Briefly, we swapped Names, and I learned that his Name was called
Zephyr. He told me that he had a message, and it took me quite a bit of
time to learn the identity of the message's sender, a question that
began as a conversational formality. The concept is not a simple one to
a Musky. I would, of course, have assumed the message was from Wendell,
but I was groggy and got involved in the slapstick semantic business of
asking the question. And so I learned that the message was not from
Wendell. It was from Dr. Mike.

The message was "Come at once."

I started to explain the difficulty of this to the Zephyr spokesman, but
reflected that his presence here unmolested put that difficulty in
considerable doubt. Undermind perception told me that his entire Name
was within the immediate vicinity. I got rustily to my feet again,
discovered that I could walk if I compensated for a tendency to float,
and shook Alia from a slumber that I was too dopey to perceive as
ominously deep.

"Alia.''

"Go away. Lemme sleep."

I pinched her in an awful place, and she yelped. "Wha . . . whassat "

"Get your toothbrush and your comic books. We're checking out."

She blinked. "Yes, Isham."If the presence of a Musky unsettled her,
she didn't show it.Probably congratulating herself on what an
imagination she's got,I thought dizzily.Maybe she's right. 

We were not fired on in the tunnel. It opened, after what I vaguely
estimated as a quarter mile, onto a comparatively enormous cave, the
size of a prosperous farmer's barn. Three male corpses and one female
lay around it like sacks of grain, their faces the characteristic
blue-green of someone who has breathed a Musky. The smell of death was
not too bad yet. I giggled at them. The Musky led us down a much bigger
tunnel to a much bigger cave. Along the way I saw occasional terrified
people staring at us from side tunnels that were blocked by hovering
Zephyrs. None spoke. I found none of this remarkable.

The new cave was enormous. Daylight came through a great beamed door in
its far wall. There were eight corpses here, two with the front of their
skulls blown away Faceless Ones who hadn't survived the operation. The
air stank of fried Musky.I thought that lasthallucination was a noisy
one , I thought, and giggled again. The giggle got louder, and kept on
getting louder, and it might have gone on forever if I hadn't tripped
over my feet and smacked my face on the rock floor.

That cleared my head which was as well, as it turned out. One of the
people huddling against the far wall, ringed in by Muskies, was Jordan
himself. He glared at me with a ferocious bloodlust that his white mask
didn't begin to hide.

"Mighty funny, ain't it " he boomed. "Seein' my people lyin' dead at
your feet. Fat city for traitors and Uncle Toms. You Musky-lovin'
sonofabitch, I get loose an' you lose that other arm an' your balls.
I'll eat your baby, boy!"

For a moment I marveled at his courage in the face of what must have
been his most persistent and recurring nightmare I wouldn't have
believed any Faceless One could be capable of speech in the presence of
so many Muskies. But my admiration was tempered by practical considerations.

"Not a chance, Jordan," I hollered back, disgusted at how thin my voice
sounded beside his. "I'm just like you: a practical man. You're just too
powerful to live and too dangerous an enemy to leave behind me." I sat
down and began smoothing out my conscious mind, refining my thoughts to
a gestalt essence that I could carry into the undermind. It was
surprisingly difficult to reach the undermind state, but I was getting
close when a hand slapped me sharply in the face.

"No,Isham!"

I shivered hugely like a sleeper awakened with ice water and forced my
eyes to track. Alia's face was before mine, a drawn, tangle-haired
scarecrow face stained with anger and urgency. Muskies hovered at her
shoulder like angry bees, a terrifying spoor, but she ignored them
utterly. "Youcan't!" she shouted, shaking my shoulders. "Oh, you
damned fool, haven't you learned anything  Are you still the same
bloodthirsty shithead I turned my back on six years ago "

And as I blinked, Jordan sprang through the cordon of Muskies around him
and yanked her away from me by the hair.

I extricated myself from the full lotus and went for him low. He was
big, but I was skilled.

And half-starved. Fast as he was at drawing that long knife, I'd have
beat him otherwise; but instead I must pull up short and watch the
shining blade caress my Alia's throat. He held her oddly, face-up across
one knee, as though he were about to lift his veil and kiss her. "Who
the man on top now, boy "

"You can lose the other half of that face mighty easy, ugly man."

"Sky-devil come near me, I put my nose on hers, an' you bet your ass
I'll hold my breath longer'n she can. Nowcall your dogs off , or I cut
the roast."

I cudgeled my brains, trying desperately to think, to function, to pull
a scheme or trick or double-cross from my terrific combat computer. I
came up dry, utterly at a loss.Collaci'd have my ass. Hot-shot hero.  

End of the road. 

"All right, Jordan. God knows your word is worthless, but I guess I
haven't got any choice. You win."

"I'll let her live, boy. You too. Hope for you both yet."

I didn't bother answering that one. I sank back into lotus, and began
again the extended mantra that led me into the undermind state. It was
easier this time, but I was too heartsick to wonder at that.

I felt the cave vanish, and then my body, and then my thoughts
themselves. My identity refined itself to a kernel, in a place unrelated
to space and time. Scattered about me in that place were the Zephyr
Muskies, all pulsing in an identical sequence that was, somehow, the
name of their Name. The "color" of the pulsing was the "feelings" that
were going through their "mind," a clumsy analogy-series that is the
best English has to offer.

The emotional sum conveyed was extreme confusion, with an undertone I
could not identify. In effect, they were puzzled by the inexplicable
delay, by this odd detour I was taking on the way to New York. The
emotions produced were clearly unpleasant why didn't I get on with it 

I informed them that the trip was off.Sorry, fellas. Something came
up you go ahead without me. I'll be along when I can.  

They rejected this flatly.

I attempted to explain that I was not unwilling but unable. The reply
was oddly like an echo my projection seemed to bounce off them and
return. Were they refusing communication  Why 

I tried again, and then again. The Zephyr Name would simply not hear of
delay. The journey was to be made, at once. I was baffled by their
intransigence this was not the lack of understanding I had encountered
so many times before with Muskies, but a willful refusal to understand.

I gave up. I could not command them to go, and I dared not bid them
attack Jordan. So I had to ignore them. I figuratively jettisoned my
weight-belt and kicked for the surface.

Random dots resolved into a picture again, the weight of air pressed
reborn flesh, distant roaring became local sound, and the stench of
fear, hate and death was everywhere. Jordan was glaring at me with
expectant triumph, that cut off as he saw my expression.

"No good, Jordan. They won't listen. They don't care about Alia but they
want me to gowith them, now, and they won't take no for an answer."

He growled. "Lyin' motherfucker, I told you what'd happen! Watch your
woman die." Alia's eyes were wide, but she made no sound.

"Kill her if you have to. Then you'll be twice my size with a full belly
and a knife in your hand, and I'll pull your brains out through your
eyesockets. Either way, these damfool Muskies won't leave until I do."
My voice was flat and dead, and his forehead wrinkled as he read my
sincerity. I think he was recalling that I was Collaci's star pupil.

"You too far gone to bluff," he said at last. "I guess the sky-devils
don't do what you say at that. What happen now "

"Beats the piss out of me. As soon as they figure out that you're what's
holding me up, you and Alia will die. I guess I walk."

He turned it over in his mind. "I guess you do."

"I'll be back, Jordan. She'd better be alive and unharmed when I do."

"Don't worry, boy. I got plans for this here lady. Be seein' you."

Muskies were swarming angrily, projecting for the first time a concerted
mood-pattern that impinged on conscious thought. It was impatience, with
an overtone of menace. I understood why ghosts had so terrified mankind
for centuries sweat broke out all over me, coldest in armpits and groin.
"Maybe not," I answered cheerily, "but we'll meet again. Bye-bye, Alia.
I'll be back for you when I can."

"I know," she said quietly, smiling at me from her awkward position
across Jordan's thigh. "Take care."

I nodded, got to my feet and walked from the cave into daylight,
followed by a phalanx of Muskies.

* * *

It was a chilly day, clouds moving south overhead. The trees were
achingly green, and the purple of lupines around the mine entrance
stabbed at eyes that had seen only black for a long week. The world was
so intolerably beautiful that I spared it a full two seconds as I turned
from the road that led into the cave-mine, and headed for the nearby
forest. By the time I reached its cover I had finalized my plans as well
as I could. Speed was essential the only possible assets I had or was
likely to get were surprise and audacity. A quick smash-and-grab had at
least a slim chance of success. I began circling north so as to hit them
from an unexpected direction.

And ran into a wall of Muskies.

The damned things would not let me by. Intangible individually, in the
mass they formed something through which I could not pass, cohering by a
means I didn't understand. Whether the constraint was physical or
psychic I don't know but in my weakened condition I lacked whatever kind
of strength it took to push my way through. I battered at them with my
body and my mind, raving and cursing in English and Swahili, but it was
useless. They were gentle, but insistent I was to go south or not at
all. No more detours.

After ten minutes of concentrated effort that left me aching in every
cell I gave up and staggered, sobbing with frustration and rage, through
the forest, heading for the Big Apple.

 


  CHAPTER FOURTEEN

As I trudged, showered with coins of sunlight, through mounds of
new-fallen leaves, my thoughts kept returning to that last confrontation
with Jordan. I couldn't understand why Alia had prevented me from asking
the Zephyrs to kill him. It didn't make sense. She had suffered as much
at his hands as I had, could envisage just as clearly the untold damage
he could cause to the world with the ammunition I had given him. Didn't
she understand that he was in his own way as dangerous to the world as
Hitler or Rockefeller had been  Why, his death wasimperative , as
necessary as had been . . .

. . . Dad's 

"Haven't you learned anything " she asked. "Well, have you " 

I had regretted having killed my father at least a dozen times, one way
or another, ever since I heard the flushing of the booby-trapped toilet.
In a hundred ways it had been brought home to me that the hasty killing
of anyone (let alone anyone possessing as much stature and power as Dad
or Jordan) could only bring chaos and sorrow, no matter how apparently
evil the victim or heinous his crime. Every evil action can be
redeemed if its perpetrator lives long enough. Hadn't Dad dedicated
himself to the most spectacular life of reparation since St. Augustine 

Even if Jordan were that favorite construct of adventure fiction, The
Man Too Dangerous to Live, even if he represented as much potential harm
as a Hitler (which I felt he did), I could not kid myself that that had
had anything to do with my wish to kill him. I had thirsted for his
blood because he had harmed my woman, my child, and myself, and because
I hated him for the ease with which he had peeled secrets out of me. I
had tried to kill him for ego reasons.

Just as I had killed Dad.

Just as the Council had condemned me.

Was passing that sort of moral irresponsibility back and forth the best
thing to do with it  Wendell was the only man I knew who had refused to
return evil for evil, and could that be why I respected him so much  If
killing were ever truly necessary, it ought to be approached
dispassionately, even compassionately, after due deliberation. I hadn't
wanted Jordan to not-be; I had wanted him to suffer. Now, I was not
certain either alternative was desirable.

This notwithstanding the fact that a portion of my hindbrain, knowing
Jordan held my Alia hostage, wanted to rip out his entrails. No doubt
close friends of his had died in the first wave of the Zephyr
assault Jordan probably wished at least as earnestly to see my own bones
bleaching in the sun. Upon which of us, then, did the homicidal impulse
confer moral superiority 

It's wrong but it seems necessary. It's necessary but it seems wrong
but it seems necessary but it seems . . . 

With a flash of pain I recalled one of the sporadic, terse conversations
Alia and I had attempted during the last days of our fast. We had
reached that point of hunger when brain cells begin to die, producing a
natural state of stonedness far beyond pot-high, something like what I
imagine the Hippie old-timers must experience when they eat amanita
muscaria and psilocybin mushrooms. We had both simultaneously
experienced the cosmic revelation that we were unique, an insight so
stupendous that we accorded it a half hour's awed contemplation. One of
those conversations.

"I mean," Alia said at last, "everyone needs to feel unique . . . but
it's okay, because they are. Look at me: I'm the best blacksmith in the
known world."

"I'munique," I heard myself say. "I am the second-best killer in the
world."

And the expression that passed over Alia's face sent me careening into a
safe haven of visual hallucinations and metaphysical speculations of an
abstract nature.

Isham Stone, by any other name, would smell a damn sight better. 

Was this the identity I had chosen for myself  Or had I let myself be
driven, like a child star thrust out onto a stage, ready to spend the
rest of my days in the tortured belief that what I had been made was
what I wanted to become 

With a flash of empathysympathy I recognized the previously
inexplicable aspect of the Zephyr tribe's collective demeanor which had
so puzzled and frustrated me. The poor bastards wereunder compulsion ,
from one they regarded as superior . . . and they didn't like it a damn
bit. Perhaps they had doubts about what they were doing but they were
somehow forbidden to entertain doubt. I wondered how Dr. Mike could pull
off a tall order like that, but it felt tooright to be wrong.

All of a sudden, I understood them a bit better. Maybe.

* * *

I came to a clearing in the woods.

The forest fell away from the spot where I sat: between balding treetops
the sunset lingered, a sunset so muted I could not say just where grey
became pink. The undersides of the two rain clouds visible were a
pink-related color I could not name but only when I didn't look directly
at them. Winged things flew widening arcs, some silently, some not. Some
thirsted for my blood; some did not.

I smelled sweet cloves, smelled wild raspberries somewhere nearby,
smelled a rich stew of spruce and pine and acres of ferns, spiced with
traces of yarrow and Queen Anne's lace and distant deer-berries. There
was a deer to the northeast a doe but she would not come close enough to
be seen. Brilliant orange butterflies flew broken-field through swaying
ferns at ground level; branch-bound leaves fluttered in pale imitation
above.

Someone had lived here once, not too many years ago. Bleached,
fire-charred eight-by-eight beams lay strewn about the clearing, barely
visible in thigh-high grass. Here and there a baby spruce rose six or
eight feet from the lighter green of weeds and wildflowers, first
footholds of a forest reclaiming its territory. In twenty years there
would be no way to tell that there had ever been a clearing here, let
alone a dwelling, a structure within which humans had lived and laughed
and loved and cried and hated and died.The forest alwayswins in the
end , I thought, and suddenly I understood for the**first time a thing
which had always puzzled me: why men would want to build cities.

Until the coming of concrete, a man battled nature for land, cleared a
piece of forest with ax and shovel and held that piece by main strength,
fighting primeval forces like weed, weather, and wild animal. If a man
died without issue, nature would destroy his works and reclaim his
fields within the space of a generation or two. Nature was mysterious,
ubiquitous, powered by forces so diverse and tenacious that they dwarfed
and terrified man.Naturam expelles furca tamen usque recurret , said
the Romans: you may drive nature out with a pitchfork, but it will return.

Well then: rip it up. Tear it asunder with great machines and seal the
earth against reseeding with an impenetrable shell of stone. Make the
city man's forever, his its only life-force. Kill the trees and flowers
and grasses and brush, drive out the animals and insects, sterilize the
region and roof it over. Keep on a few pigeons and dogs, reluctantly, as
pensioners. Retain a few tamed bits of nature on exhibit, but thinned,
gelded, dependent on man.

Then discover that there is something more terrible than nature to be
locked in with: yourself.

Where once men linked arms in common cause to withstand a mystifying and
hostile nature, they built a place so safe, so secure that they had
nothing against which to strive, save each other. No wonder they built
their cities. And no wonder they left them.

I stopped in my tracks, sat down on crackly autumn leaves and rolled my
eyes upward. Almost before I began the mantra, I was in that sidewise
plane of being Wendell had named the undermind, and this time a visual
analogy was by far the strongest perception I had of the Zephyrs: I
"saw" them as points in a lattice, a three-dimensional and not at all
symmetrical network of amber fireflies against a field azure, all this
with a clarity I had never before experienced.

I assembled my thought into a gestalt, refined it to its
essence.(Pawns ) is about as close as I can render it in English.

The response was a joyous blast combining elements of agreement, delight
in our mutual discovery, and respect; all somehow compressed into one
concept-unit.

(Me too)I sent back, connotingdon't feel so bad: I walk the same
road. (Allone ) Are we not all part of the same thing  

Their reply translated best as a maxim I have heard attributed to the
Vikings: no manescapes his weird.It contained neither despair nor
resignation, but calm acceptance. As stated, it did not seem to conflict
with free will.

I made a final sending approximating(Q.E.D.) or(There you go). We
exchanged the extrasensory equivalent of a smile, and broke contact.

But it seemed to me, as the next few miles put themselves behind me,
that I had not entirely left the undermind, and that from that day
forth, a part of me never would.

* * *

Five days' travel had brought us to New York. It didn't seem to smell as
bad as I remembered. My Musky honor guard left me at the Broadway
entrance to Columbia and vanished among the rooftops, all thirty-four of
them, each in a different direction. Before I was halfway to Butler,
Gowan and Wendell came running to meet me, both obviously excited and
elated. We embraced. It was a moment of strong emotion, but of course I
had to try and ground it out.

"You," I growled at Gowan, the moment we untangled ourselves. "Was it
you sicked those animated farts on me "

"Eh " He blinked. "Well, yes. I asked the Zephyr Name to find you and
bring you back at all costs when you didn't arrive back here soon after
I did I thought your escape had gone sour. I was half-afraid you were
dead. Did I do wrong "

"The damned things wouldn't let me hang around long enough to spring
Alia. Jordan snatched us both from Fresh Start."

"Oh,no!" We took turns explaining to Wendell who Alia was, and his
face too became sad. I brought them both up to date.

"Well, what's done is done," I told Gowan at last. "You probably saved
my life. While I'm here I can pick up some things I need to spring Alia
from that hole in the ground. Hell, there's even a chance that
pucker-faced clown actually let her go. He did promise, once maybe he
stood in a draft and caught a bad case of honor."

Gowan made the terrible face that meant he had something unpleasant to
say. "Isham I hope so."

"Huh  What do you mean "

"I hope Alia is all right where she is because you must not leave. Not
soon, at any rate. There is work for you here."

"Now, listen . . ."

"Hear me out. Or better yet, hear me in it's chilly out." He turned and
headed for Butler. I followed, in angry confusion. Didn't he understand
thatAlia was in danger  By damn, if he tried to stop me with those
Zephyrs again, I'd load up with Musky-shot and . . .

Fight my way through my brothers Shut up, old son your stupidity is
showing. 

We entered Butler. A large piece of equipment stood in the lobby the
alpha-feedback amplifier and transmitter that Wendell and I had used
both to train our undermind and to broadcast it like a beacon. But it
was changed almost beyond recognition. It had been built onto, to such
an enormous extent that its own four wheels were no longer adequate to
support it. It rested now on a large pallet with two fixed and two free
wheels, surrounded by auxiliary devices bound to it with a forest of
cables. Its omnidirectional antenna had been replaced by a tweeter-like
horn, and there were other changes I vaguely perceived but was not
equipped to recognize. In all it only slightly resembled the machine I
had first seen Wendell using to communicate with Muskies, from my
sickroom window, about a thousand years earlier.

"I bet it gets FM and police band now, huh, doc " I said, examining it
and feeling my composure return.

"Don't make light of it, Isham," Wendell said almost paternally.
"Michael has improved immeasurably on my work, and in a very short time."

"I wasn't making light," I protested. "I'm really impressed."

"Exactly what you are, my boy," Gowan said jovially. "Impressed in the
old sense of the word. `Drafted,' as it was described more recently."

"What for "

"To use this Frankensteinian gizmo that Wendell and I have made to talk
with the High Muskies."

"Huh You mean you can get through to them with that contraption "

"No, I mean we can reach them with that contraption. We can knock on
their figurative door. It is my devout hope thatyou can `get through
to' them."

"Why me  What makes you think I can do it if you can't "

"Because you're unique, Isham." Wendell put in excitedly.

"I know that but I don't see how it'll help in this case."

"Eh "

"Skip it I want to know whatyou mean."

"What Wendell means, Isham," Gowan said cheerfully, "is that you are, so
far as is known, humanity's best telepath."

"What " 

"Yep. Oh, you're only an apprentice yet. But I believe training and
practice will make you the world's most efficient communicator at least
on the psychic band."

Inside me, something was careening and shifting like unstowed cargo in a
storm-tossed vessel; yet I hadn't moved a muscle. "What the hell gives
you that idea " I asked almost angrily.

"The EEG built into that alpha-feedback machine of Wendell's," Gowan
returned calmly. "The two of you were using a device you had found, not
made, and you never fully explored its potential. It monitored your
brain-wave patterns and fed you a visual cue soft light when you
attained a consistent state of alpha wave production the doorway to the
undermind. But at the same time the machine wasrecording your
brainwaves and you never thought to examine the EEG tapes."

"I don't get it."

"Okay. Pardon me if I get pedantic the lecture habit is hard to break.
Alpha waves are one kind or pattern of electrical activity produced by
the human brain, lying between either eight and twelve or seven and
thirteen cycles per second depending on which authority you subscribe
to. It's a subtle energy, measured in microvolts. It wasn't discovered
until 1929, and very little was done with it until the seventies and
eighties, when the spiritual renaissance hit the Pre-Exodus world.
Virtually everyone produces alpha naturally: Rosenberg's researches
indicated that only about eight percent of people produced no alpha in
normal waking state. The key, however, is in amplitude.

"The average untrained human's alpha production measures about ten or
fifteen microvolts. With careful and intensive training, it can peak as
high as sixty microvolts. In the late seventies, recordings were made of
Zen masters who registered as high as a hundred microvolts, though only
in surges, and only in near-cataleptic meditative trance.

"I can show you recordings of your own alpha, made by you on that
infernal machine there, that peak at a hundred and twenty-seven
microvolts, and average ninety-eight."

From assassin to Zen master in one easy lesson. There you go. 

"That's nice," I said weakly.

"Nice  It's essential!" Wendell burst out. "Thanks to Michael's timely
arrival and unceasing labor, we now have a functioning EM carrier wave
which a High Musky could follow down to us, hand over hand as it were."

"Ordinary Muskies come down the thing like a homesick water buffalo down
a viaduct," Gowan put in.

"But we have been unable to contact a High Musky, or induce one to
follow the carrier wave to us," Wendell went on. "The lesser Muskies
seem to assure us that it can be done, that a High Musky could reach us
by such means but none have."

"There's a bunch of folks weneed to speak with, ten stories up," Gowan
interrupted again, "and so we keep slapping a ladder against the side of
the building. What we need is somebody with enough lungpower to shout
`Hey! Come on down!' and be heard. I haven't got the psychic lungs for
it, and neither does Wendell."

"That's why you must stay," Wendell continued. "It's essential that . . ."

"Whoa!" I said, "Hold off the vaudeville cross-talk act for a minute and
let me get a word in edgewise. Why me  Why can't the lower Muskies pass
along a message by riding our EM waveup  "

"Beats me," Gowan said cheerfully, "but they refuse. Maybe they're
reluctant to disturb the boss. Maybe their language lacks the necessary
concepts. Maybe there's some sort of taboo involved. All I know is, they
can't or won't extend a dinner invitation upstairs for us. We've been
trying for days."

"What makes you thinkI could "

"You're the only one we have left. What you've told me about the
political situation up north makes it even more imperative that weend
the damned war now! Before the last two factions left in the nation
destroy each other in a stupid, useless ideological wrangle.

"If we can get through to the High Muskies we can offer them the deal
you failed to sell to the Council and if they buy it, you and Ican
sell it to Krishriamurti because I'll stuff it down his throat with a
history text. We're gambling that the High Muskies can talk with one
another because we haven't the time to wait for a worldwide congress and
we're gambling that they're psychologically equipped to make racial
policy in agreement, and we're gambling that their social structure
allows them to put it across. Not to mention the gamble that the idea of
peaceful coexistence will appeal to them.

"But most of all we're gambling on you."

"But why " I cried for what seemed the thousandth time. "Because I have
a gift for relaxed thinking  That's all alphais , you know the
characteristic pattern of meditative thought. It's not telepathy, any
more than closing your eyes is sleeping."

"Yes, but that's a good analogy," Gowan insisted, " because closing your
eyes, while not essential, is a big help. I cite studies by Krippner and
Ullman, Stanford and Levin, the Dream Laboratories at Maimonides in
Brooklyn and the Paranormal Activities Department of Columbia, all of
which indicated a close connection between alpha production and
paranormal sensitivity. None but the last of these studies dealt with
telepathy as such Rhine-card guessing was their main focus but even
earlier studies by Kamiya and by Budzynski and Stoyva showed that alpha
production, and particularly alpha training by feedback, caused subjects
to experience marked increases in empathy. And you know perhaps better
than I, Isham, that what Muskies do is closer to empathy than it is to
telepathy."

"About sixty-forty," I corrected absently. My mind was humming like a
cable under strain.

"Wendell tells me you've had infinitely more success with undermind
communication than he has . . ."

"More depth," Wendell interrupted.

". . . despite the fact that he's had a twenty-year head start and a
damned sight more motivation. Hadn't the significance of that struck you "

"I guess I just thought I smoked more dope," I mumbled without thinking.
The notion had been largely subconscious.

"Don't forget that idea," Gowan suggested. "Someday the researchers
picking over your brain may get five hundred pages of speculation out of
it. The correlation between use of mild psychedelics and
alpha-proficiency is one of the things that was under study at Columbia
when the Exodus intervened but I suspect that in future days our best
ambassadors will be those offspring of old hippie stock who haven't
rebelled against their parents' lifestyles. God knows not many kids at
Fresh Start smoke the stuff, the way Krishnamurti discourages it . . .
you being of course exempt by virtue of parentage. However, Isham, I'd
also credit the fact that you're trained in Eastern philosophy, in
meditative disciplines thanks to me and I'll mention it to any
researchers I meet.

"All this, of course, assumes that the human race will survive long
enough to produce either researchers or ambassadors, which is by no
means certain. But if you feel youmust go back north to pull Alia out
of the hole, itwill be certain, in my mind . . . that we are, god
forgive the clich, doomed."

"Something I forgot to tell you, Dr. Mike."

"Please, Isham you're a grownup now. Michael, or Mike. What's the forgot "

"Alia's pregnant, Mike."

His face went expressionless. "Oh my god. Yours, of course  Of course.
Well, I suppose we can get along without you after all there's a trick
with hypothalamus-induced feedback training I've been meaning to try . .
." His thoughts were already leaving the here and now.

"You misunderstand me. I want my baby to grow up. When do we start "

He grinned. "Five minutes ago." Something about the grin said he was
proud of me. Well, so was I but there was a terrible knot in my heart
that seemed to be seriously interfering with its function.

I'm sorry, my beloved no man can escape his weird. 

* * *

Four hours later we were outside, under a starry sky, gathered near a
fire that leaped and crackled.

"Well," I said, breaking a long silence, "I wonder if the folks back
home miss the truck, Mike."

"Your father insisted we have no more than one internal combustion
vehicle running specifically so we wouldn't get dependent on them. I'm
sure the fuel will be put to good use."

"Cut with lemon juice and sugar," I guessed wistfully.

Wendell reached into a brand-new (from his point of view) U.S. Army
field jacket and produced a long green bottle. It bore a handmade white
label whose only legend was four crude Xs a classical touch I admired.
It gurgled pleasantly.

"I have a little tonic of my own, here," he said diffidently, "which you
gentlemen might find tolerable. It's an excellent vintage: two weeks old."

"I'll drink to that," Gowan and I simultaneously said, and we did. I
don't want to use a lot of clichs about the potency of Carlson's
moonshine I won't claim smoke came out of our ears, or that our fillings
melted, or any of that. But I will say that if you poured some across an
itching back, the stuff would scratch it. I must admit that Gowan outdid
me. His eyes watered too, but his nose didn't run and he was able to
talk in almost no time. "Smooth," he croaked. "What do you call this stuff "

Wendell recovered the bottle, took a staggering long swallow, and smiled
like an angel.

"Boozo," he said placidly.

Before long we were agreeing, just like they all do, that the stuff grew
on you once the scar tissue had formed on your tongue, and not long
after that I discovered I was feeling better. Alcohol is a drug I use
only seldom; in consequence I appreciate it. Alcoholism, Shorty always
used to say, is what happens when good liquor falls into the hands of
amateurs.

But it came to me, while I scratched some overlooked electrode-paste
from my arm, that the peace I was feeling was only partly drug-induced.
It occurred to me that although I had scavenged marijuana as well as
food on the way to New York, I hadn't felt the need to smoke any lately.
I spoke of this to Wendell and Mike. "Right now my woman and unborn
child are in Jordan's hands, Fresh Start is in danger of mob violence,
and I can't seem to get a High Musky on the phone. And yet I'm sitting
here in relative tranquillity, and my fingernails are long enough to
need clipping. Where's that at "

"A number of possible explanations," Gowan said. His lean features took
well to firelight; it struck gold from his Van Dyke, and made his nose
lordly. "For one thing, alpha-feedback training is said to reduce
anxiety, to allow you to adapt to and tolerate anxiety-producing
situations. Your unique talent for communication is more than a parlor
trick, you know. It carries over into your life, one influencing the
other. To me your calm is a sure sign that wewill succeed tomorrow.
This afternoon was only the first try you can't expect instant success.

"Another possibility is that you've burned out your adrenals. So much
has happened to you lately that by now you must have learned that
anxiety is pragmatically unsound." That rang a bell. "Or it could be
that you're too fatigued to worry."

"I favor another possibility," Wendell put in. "It involves the ability
to appreciate the inevitable. You know in your heart that you're doing
the best you can for Alia, Fresh Start,and the High Muskies so you've
put away fear and uncertainty."

" `There was nothing more I could do, so I took a nap,' " Gowan quoted
thoughtfully. "I believe you've hit it, Wendell. He's grown up."

"Thanks, fellas," I said dryly, but I confess I was proud. "If I'm so
smart why won't a High Musky talk to me "

"Now don't go spoiling your tranquillity," Gowan mocked, and then
paused, "Isham . . . I've got only one suggestion. There was a man
called Stephen Gaskin, once for all I know he's still alive in
Tennessee who wrote a mighty book calledMonday Night Class . I haven't
read it in over twenty years, but one part comes back to me now."

"Yeah "

"Stephen suggested that if telepathy ever got to be popular, people were
going to find out that they had to shovel out the Communications Room
before they could get anywhere."

"I don't get you."

"The Communications Room, he said, was the subconscious."

"Oh."

Wendell got warily to his feet and tossed another few pieces of chair on
the fire. "In twenty years of cold winters I haven't made a dent in the
supply of chairs Columbia has to offer," he said reflectively. "I
imagine I never will. I'm going to bed, gentlemen."

"Good night."

"Good night, Wendell."

He left, whistling a tune I didn't recognize. A silence ensued.

"How do you shovel out your subconscious, Doct . . . Mike "

"Well, actually, it's more a matter of opening it up than anything else.
Shit decomposes in the presence of air and sunlight. The Catholics used
to have a very effective custom called confession."

I thought about it. "I still feel confusion about Dad," I said at last.
"No about the idea of killing in general. I know I tried to kill Jordan
for what seemed to me to be totally righteous reasons and yet Alia made
me realize, hours later, that it was just that killer ape that lives in
the back of my brain. Hey, I'll bet that's why I had so much trouble
getting to the undermind, that one time I tried to get the Zephyrs to
kill Jordan for me. I never thought of that."

"It's hard to be relaxed when you're thinking of murder," Gowan agreed.

"Dammit, Mike, I made a conscious decision, a few years back, to let you
drift out of my life and let Collaci drift in. He taught me everything
there is to know about killing and it's about everything I know. I think
I made a bum decision. Thanks for giving me a line on a new profession."

"Perfectly all right," he said lightly. "Vocational counseling is a
hobby of mine."

And he left, and I sat by a waning fire and thought until I had killed
the Boozo and worked it out for myself. Then I kicked earth over the
coals and went to bed.

Communication,I thought as I drifted off to sleep on the first
mattress I had known in weeks,what a lovely thing to be unique at. What
an altogether fine thing.  

 


  CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Gowan didn't appear at breakfast the next morning. Wendell and I managed
to find a use for his share of the oatmeal but it took us a while, and
we spent another half an hour in sitting around and belching. As we
seemed to be out of conversation, this made for a lot of silence. After
a time I couldn't stand it any more.

"Why don't you ask me how I made out shoveling out my subconscious last
night, Wendell "

He made no answer. His hand crept up to his beard and stroked it nervously.

"Why is there this unease between us "

He made an abortive effort at piling up the dishes for washing, and gave
it up half-done. He sat back and sighed, looking around the kitchen he
had made out of an office. "I don't know," he said at last.

"This father-son thing between us," I said softly. "It isn't working
out, is it "

He tried to look startled and failed. "I suppose not."

"Is it because of the closer rapport that Mike and I already have "

I could not interpret his silence.

"Is it because of my father "

No answer.

"Is it because I'm black "

"Damnation!"he burst out, eyes flashing in aged sockets. "All of those
things and none of them! Devil take it, why do youtug so hard  Isham,
I am tooold to be a father. And you are too old to be a son. A man my
age isn't prepared to undertake as intense and involved a relationship
as parenthood that's why my prime child-siring years passed decades ago.
And if that weren't enough, I've spent twenty years in utter isolation
from my own kind, relating only to myself. I expect to be emotionally
and socially crippled for the rest of my life, and I must tell you that
at times I find the simple presence of another human irritating beyond
belief. I don'twant to leave New York and you can't stay. When you
came here I did my best to meet your needs, physical and emotional but
frankly, I made a rotten father, and I believe you know it. I sensed
violences in your soul, terrible twistings in your heart. But I never
spoke of them, never tried to ease them, because after so many years,
emotion of that intensity terrified me. I hadn't the courage to be frank
with you, as a father must, and so there is a last death on my conscience.

"Damn you, take your emotions and your emotional needs and your aching
guilts and get away from me. At this time in my life I need friends, not
children!" And he fled weeping.

The man speaks truth, old son. You are an awful old son, at that. You
can scrap your father, but you can't start over. Wendell saved your
life he didn't offer you his. 

Gowan came in the door with an armload of electronic hardware. I snapped
out of my trance.

"I just passed Wendell on the quadrangle," he said. "What are his tears
for "

"Those aren't his tears he's crying," I said bitterly. "They're mine."

"Oh." He placed his foraged swag on the breakfast table, and ran a hand
through his tangled yellow mane. "Want some pearls of wisdom "

"Sure," I said resignedly, and then I said "Sure," in a completely
different way.

"When you do someone a disservice, you can brood on it, thereby doubling
its ill effect on the world in general. Or you can go do them a service."

I thought awhile. "Well," I said finally, "I know the choice that Dad
made." I got up and brushed past him.

"Isham . . ." he called out as I went out the door.

I turned back. "Yeah "

"Be easy on yourself. You've been doing your level best all along.
You've just got to keep growing all the time to stay alive."

I thought that over. "Thanks, Mike. See you at the perpetual emotion
machine."

"I'll have some surprises for you."

I found Wendell behind Low, sitting at the base of a broad tree, gazing
up at Low's great vaulting dome. It was a chilly morning, and of course
he had forgotten his jacket, so I gave him the spare I'd fetched. He put
it on gratefully, and the locking of our eyes for the next minute may
have been the bravest thing either of us has ever done. I knew that if I
apologized I would only make him feel worse, but I didn't know what else
to say

In the end I stuck out my hand. "Dr. Carlson," I said formally, "I'd
like to introduce myself. My name is Isham Stone. I believe you knew my
father Jacob."

His face lit up with a smile that dislodged dust from his beard.
"Louie," he said, appearing to be quoting something, "something tells me
this is the start of a beautiful friendship." He took my hand and shook
it for a long time.

* * *

When we got back to Butler, Gowan was making final adjustments on his
new mad scientists' components, which he had set up near the modified
alpha machineEM transmitter and connected to its power source. He
looked up, assessed our expressions and smiled, scratching his thigh
with a screwdriver. "Should have thought of this days ago," he greeted us.

"Thought of what "

"Come here."

He had placed an improvised za-zen cushion on the ground between the
machines for me to sit on. I put it under my tailbone, where it would
help keep my spine straight, and let him put the helmet on me and fasten
the electrode tendrils to all my strategic points with paste. With the
new machine there were almost twice as many, in different places, and I
began to feel like an overloaded fuse box. "What's the new gadget "

"The surprise I promised you," Gowan said, continuing to work. "I had a
genuine, certified Inspiration, and I found what I needed in the Psych
Department. There you're connected. Now I want you to drop into
undermind but don't bother chatting with the locals, anddon't reach
for the sky. Not yet."

"Okay, Mike. Setting up exercises it is."

The neighborhood undermind was not crowded at this time of day. I sensed
a few windriders beyond Lowe, but they were headed for the Hudson with a
strong tail wind. I hung around for a while in what seemed like a sea of
purple velvet, thinking no thoughts at all. Then I made the
hand-over-hand climb back to consciousness.

". . . st as I thought," Gowan was saying. "Look there, Wendell." They
were peering in the opened lid of the new machine. Their eyes flickered
from side to side.

"Well, doc "

Gowan looked up, glee in his eyes. "Come look at this."

I rose and dragged my web over to him and Wendell. The thing they were
watching was a strip of recording tape just like that made by the EEG.
EKG  It was not recording anything at the moment; the stylus traced a
straight line. "Looks like I've had a cardiac arrest."

"Idiot," Gowan said fondly. "I've shut off the inputs or you'd have
given it St. Vitus's Dance when you got up. Wait." He ran the tape back
to the test section. Whatever the machine recorded had obviously been
happening intensely the peaks were high and close together.

"I give up. That sure isn't either EEG or EKG."

"It's EMG, Isham."

"Isaid I give up."

"An electromyograph. It measures electrical activity of the muscles.
This particular model is hypersensitive, designed to detect muscle
tension in `motionless' subjects. And it confirms what I suspected: that
while you're in the undermind state your muscles tense up to a
significant degree."

"Why "

"Beats me." He shrugged. "Maybe just some kind of subconscious sentry
system . . . did I say something wrong "

"Au contraire," I said weakly. "Okay, so I'm tensed up some. So "

"So alpha is the pattern of relaxed thought. If you're tensing up your
muscles, it cuts down on your alpha performance."

"You mean I've been making Zen masters look like twitches andI wasn't
even at peak efficiency "  

"Just what I mean."

"Hmmm." I resisted the urge to scratch an electrode. "Well, I don't see
how I can fix it. When I'm in the undermind, I'maway ."

"I've got an idea," Gowan suggested. "Are you holding "

"Eh  Yeah. Five jays in my pocket. Why "

"Light up, lad. Light up. Cannabis sativa is an excellent muscle
relaxant. I may have a toke myself."

Wendell looked scandalized, but said nothing. I took the old tobacco tin
from my Agro-shirt pocket, and removed a fat joint I had rolled hash
flecks into. The doobie had been in the tin long enough to smell like
the twenty-year-old Erinmore Flake it had formerly contained, a not
unpleasant mixture with the scent of the grass itself. Gowan produced a
light, and we passed the blast back and forth for a few minutes, while
Wendell studied the ground. "Ever go undermind stoned " Gowan squeaked,
holding down his last toke. The world had begun to sparkle while I
wasn't looking.

"I'll be damned," I decided. "No." I took my own last hit and ate the
roach. "I guess," I said and sucked air, "I wanted," sucked air, "to
have my head," sucked air, "clear," exhaled. "Or something."

Gowan let his out too. "Maybe you just didn't want to put those sentries
to sleep."

"Past their bedtime," I said. "Want to try the EMG again "

"Let it take hold first," he suggested. "Relax."

"Fine. Hey, Mike! I've got an Inspiration of my own. How about if we
wait for some Muskies to come along, then have them cluster around me
while I transmit "

"Why "

"I dunno. Itfeels like a good idea."

"We'll try it, then," he said at once. "Maybe their presence will help
make your gestalt sendings more recognizable to a High Musky. Or
something. How the hell do I know "

"Okay, then. I'll wait in the undermind, if it's all the same to you
guys, but don't expect anything until you smell a bunch of Muskies
gathering 'round. Then start praying."

"We will, brother," Wendell said.

* * *

I had hardly got seated properly when the undermind came on, and this
time it was not something I entered but something that washed over me
like a tidal wave.

I can't describe the difference adequately it was something like the
difference between kissing and making love. Instead of being immersed in
purple velvety Jell-O, Iwas purple velvety Jell-O. I seemed to have
more than six senses. The ninth or was it the tenth  sense perceived a
kind of ongoing phenomenon that reminded me startlingly of Miles Davis's
later work, although it was more analagous to light than to sound.

The other senses I can't even describe by analogy. Nor even number my
memory banks simply weren't geared up to accept them, and they rejected
all but a few.

But one thing I retain. I realized with a shocking suddenness that I
wasmoving , that I had left my physical body. It was a feeling very
like losing your steering box halfway down the mountain all at once
you're in uncontrolled motion. I was notfalling  the motion was
multidirectional, simultaneous and quite violent. I was an immense
inertialess bullet caroming off the walls of the Universe at translight
velocities. I reached for the brakes, and they weren't there.

Fear tugged at me, a fear I'm sure my six familiar senses would never
have consciously perceived. With all the force of my will I struck at
the fear, smothering it with all the wisdom I had gleaned from my life,
choking it with the conviction that only the mind at peace can
accomplish anything useful. Hours passed while I strove.

It was a terrific struggle.

The fear died.

I monitored the old six senses of the body I had left behind a thing I
had never been capable of in the undermind before along some
inexplicable but invulnerable conduit, and learned that my body was
utterly relaxed, all muscles limp, eyeballs rolled up. I had been away
for a long time the sun was setting.

("A hundred and forty-four microvolts!" Mike was breathing, but I
ignored it.)

I cast myself back outward and rode the multidirectional psychic
"wave" like a surfer, like a pinball, like . . .

Like a Musky.

Oh, yeah you're working. 

I realized that I had been for some time aware of hundreds of other
hurtlingselves, in swarms like psychedelic sparks from the Universal
Fire, and knew that they were Muskies. Conscious translation into terms
acceptable to my "old," six-senses orientation told me that they were
all the Muskies within a hundred mile radius. I would later find this
considerably impressive, but at the time I only ascertained the
geographically closest Name and forced myself (by a means indescribable
that simply occurred to me as I needed it) into a matching course with them.

(Attend me),I commanded.

Profoundly startled, they did so.

Their Name was Mistral. At my direction, they ranged their physical
selves around my own. Dimly, I sensed the nearby sparks that were
Wendell and Mike. I was becoming more accustomed to the wild motion of
my psychicself , noticing correlations between it and the physical
universe with which I was familiar. I took a sight from that
universe-plane and analogized it into the "direction" (slightly more
accurately, the "pattern") I wanted to "face" ("assume"). I allowed
myself to meld identities with the Muskies, to blend myself with
theirs until it seemed that I rode the swirling breezes of the campus
about my own body. A hippie would say that I "cut loose of my ego."

I married them.

The thing I waited for came.

It was blue, and it was vaguely warm, and it was metallic, and it was
none of these things. It sounded like an oboe, and it felt like an
angora, and it tasted like aspirin, and it looked like ball lightning,
and it did none of these things. It projected love and concern and
suspicion and curiosity, and it felt none of these things.

It was a High Musky, and its name and its Name, I knew, were Mistral.
High Mistral.

(THANK BEING), it "said." (WE HAVE WAITED FOR SO LONG!)

* * *

". . . so they did the only thing they could do," I said, and gulped
more coffee. "Kept sending the lower Muskies into contact with us, in
the faint hope of reaching a human mind for long enough to teach it
telepathy." My body was shivering, but I felt okay.

"Even though they knew our own subconscious hate and fear would probably
drive the Muskies kill-crazy," Mike said wonderingly, and sighed through
his teeth. "I often wondered why the war went on and on, even though
possession of territory didn't seem to be an issue. Why fight a human
when you can catch the next breeze and be miles away in seconds  Answer:
because your elders insist you try and teach him how to talk, even if he
does shoot you on smell."

"God, how patient and forgiving the High Muskies must be!" Wendell burst
out.

"No," I corrected. "Any attempt you make at attributing human thoughts,
concepts or emotional patterns to High Muskies will inevitably be
incorrect, crude analogyat best . You can not attempt to make their
motivations fit any scheme you can comprehend. They'redifferent . By
their lights they've only been doing what was the next thing to do."

"What havewe done byour lights, then," Wendell cried, "if that's all
we can evaluate  For centuries we've perverted their children, turned
them into werewolves and demons and ghosts with our twisted hates and
fears and needs and then we remove their food supply and offer them
waves of hate to empathize with."

"I'm afraid so," I agreed sourly. "Because of the nature of a Name,
Muskies can'thelp empathizing it's what keeps them together and in
contact with the High Muskies. And it also makes them vulnerable to
human minds in shifting psychic orientation enough to project emotions
and moods at us, they necessarily take on enough of our way of thinking
to become emotionally disturbed."

"Hence the long-noted perversity and sadism of ghosts," Mike said sadly.
"Man literally fashioned his own bogeymen."

"And his own enemies."

"And his own friends, brother. How much of a friend is High Mistral "

"I don't know how to answer that, in human terms. He was in contact with
all the other High Muskies now living, somehow, but he wouldn't let me
perceive any but him he said it would `derange' me. In effect I guess he
was the Ambassador for the Stratosphere. There was a general awareness
that we wanted the War ended, but we didn't think a lot about it. If you
want to know the truth, we spent most of the conversation examining a
sequence of . . . phenomena that haven't got words, trying to decide
whether or not it was beautiful."

"You did propose the treaty "

I guess I looked sheepish. "It never entered my mind."

"Suffering Jesus, Isham!"

"Mike you had to be there." 

He started to speak, then shut up. "I guess so," he said softly. "I
guess so." Wendell looked thoughtful almost wistful.

"Mostly he `talked' and I `listened.' I absorbed a lot of information
from him that he wasn't actually sending, and for all I know he read the
treaty in my mind. But it never became a topic of discussion. What we
were trying to accomplish seemed to be perfecting the empathy between
us, learning to think and feel in a sort of third language acceptable to
us both. And so we spoke of beauty, rather than politics."

"You don't sound a lot like you, Isham," Mike said curiously.

"Maybe I'm not," I grinned, "but I feel just fine. We'll get around to
the treaty, Mike, and damned soon. Don't worry."

"I'm not worried about a single thing, Isham. You've done magnificently."

"You have indeed," Wendell said gravely, and I felt a wave of warmth
from both of them. It pleased me in a way I had never known before.

"I just had to learn one thing," I said, "and the lesson was given
memonths ago. Just before I came up to your front door with guns
blazing, Wendell, I massacred a cat that leaped out in front of me on
the street. Just pulverized it before I even saw it.

"I shot without thinking because I was in New York, and I was afraid.

"Again and again since that time, I've lashed out, for the most logical-
and noble-sounding reasons because I was afraid. It's an entirely human
reflex, and one that probably was of great use to the Neanderthal. But
Cro-Magnon began suppressing it, and we've got to complete the job if
we're ever going to live in peace with the Muskies. I had to defeat my
fear before High Mistral wouldlet me perceive him I think by sheer
force of will he could have held me at a lower plane of awareness, and I
think he would have. I had to grow up, as you gentlemen put it.

"Muskies occupy a peculiar ecological niche. They're perpetually being
whirled into the unexpected, and have little to fear in the way of
natural enemies. That's not to say that they don't know fear but when
they do feel it, their impulse is to catch a stiff wind to elsewhere and
think about it. From the High Musky point of view, our panic response to
the unknown made us dangerously insane. Contagiously so. They decided to
remain aloof and contact us only through the lower Muskies."

"The Muskies told me I had to `go higher' to reach the High Muskies,"
Wendell said, shaking his head, "and for ten years I thought they meant
physically."

"High Mistral could have come down and sat in my lap," I told him dryly,
"if there'd been any reason to. High Muskies keep their bodies parked in
the stratosphere, not because age has diminished their mass although it
has, considerably but because it's a better neighborhood up there. To
hang out down here they'd have to develop the same sort of subconscious
sentries I used to have and as we all learned, that sort of thing is
alien to their whole being."

"One thing puzzles me," Wendell spoke up. "This emotional contagion
business do you mean to say that the Muskies who attacked you so
savagely when you came here  "

". . . were my own kill-frenzy, all the poison in my skull embodied in
the temporary insanity of a few passing empaths."

"Then how did you manage to communicate with the Zephyrs at Jordan's
Cave  Why didn't they sense the murder in your heart and become deranged "

"They might have if they had only come by in response to Mike's request.
But High Zephyr apparently followed enough of the conversation to become
interested, and `seconded the motion' with some kind of dire compulsion.
The Zephyrs were insulated from my rage, partly because it was not
directed at them, and partly because they were fixated on the
accomplishment of an utterly imperative task: to wit, fetching me back
to your EEGEMGPDQ, Mike."

He was lounging in the doorway, hands in his coveralls. "I thought it
was snappy service I was getting," he said, and smiled. "Good night, you
two."

"Good night, Michael."

"Dream good dreams, Mike."

Wendell looked a bit awkward when Mike was gone, and I remembered a
thing I had nearly forgotten. "Wendell "

"Yes, Isham "

"When I wanted to get the Zephyrs to off Jordan for me, I had great
difficulty reaching the undermind. Then when I cut loose of killing him,
I was able to achieve rapport to a degree. Do you know why 

"Because when I made that decision, I figured I was completely licked,
just finally and forever fucked. Jordan had Alia and the jig was up. And
so they were able to `let me in' for the same reason you've gotten along
so peacefully with Muskies for twenty years which is the same reason
you've never gotten any farther with them than you have."

He looked puzzled and a bit hurt, but I plunged on.

"I despaired, Wendell. I despaired, and instead of disturbing them, it
rolled right off their backs. Despair isn't an emotion they find
dangerous or threatening.

"To them it's just utterly incomprehensible."

His face became very old for a long time. And then gradually years
seemed to melt from it, and its deep lines became only a record of
history. He smiled, a much softer and younger smile than the one I'd
seen that morning.

"Isham," he said wistfully, "do you think perhaps some day somehow you
and your hundred and forty-four microvolts could take along a hitchhiker "

"Wendell," I said, grinning fiercely, "I purely hope so."

* * *

After he had gone I lay back on the familiar bed and looked around the
room I remembered so well. In days and nights past it had been a
battleground, the scene of huge warring emotions and bitter interior
dialogues, a place where my subconscious fomented bloody conflict.

Right at the moment it seemed like a very peaceful place.

* * *

I awoke to find myself running full-tilt down the hallway.

"MIKE!" I roared. "WENDELL! Up and at 'em scramble.Red alert. " I tore
past their rooms without waiting for reply. I noted that I was carrying
my old one-heeled pair of shoes in my hand, the rest of my clothes
pinned against my chest by my arm. Then I was tearing around a corner,
bare feet giving excellent traction.

I didn't take time to dress until I had the truck started and backed
around to the front doors of Butler. It was a rosy dawn. By the time I
zipped up my shirt, Mike and Wendell had arrived. Neither was the least
bit bleary-eyed or befuddled, for which I was briefly grateful. "Mike,"
I ordered, "go scrounge food and water for a day or two, and a couple of
blankets, and coats for all of us. Wendell, get aboard and direct me to
the Organic Chem building I want to fuel up."

"There's gasoline here," he began.

"Too inefficient I want all the horsepower and mileage I can get, and
that means pure grain alcohol."

He shut up and climbed into the truck with a limberness that belied his
years. We sped across the campus through tall grasses, and I prayed for
an absence of broken beer bottles. There were two spare tires in the bed
of the truck, World War II unstoppables on modified rims, but I figured
to need them both: Mike had left Fresh Start with six. We crashed up a
flight of steps and onto College Walk, and now I know what a milkshake
feels like.

"Doesn't burning alcohol affect your carburetor " was all Wendell asked.

"Sure cleans it out and keeps it that way. Only reason they ever started
using petrol was that it used to be the cheapest thing imaginable. Waste
product of kerosene production."

We alkied up and stowed a number of drums of the stuff in silent haste,
then sped back to Butler. Mike was waiting with a two-day-on-the-road
survival kit that showed rapid, careful thought, and he had it aboard
almost before we stopped. He vaulted over the tailgate, blond mane
flying, and waved wagons-ho. With a screech of tires and the roar of an
indignant transmission, we tore around Butler and onto the street. It
was tricky having to let go of the wheel to shift gears, so I left her
in second.

Mike climbed in the window as we sailed down Amsterdam Avenue, swerving
around obstacles, on and off the sidewalk, averaging forty per. He slid
next to Wendell and ran a hand through his blond hair.

"Lot of Muskies following us," he said conversationally.

"I know."

They both waited patiently until I had a clear stretch which allowed me
to give driving less than total attention, which pleased me deeply. "Got
a visitation," I said then, "in the nature of a news bulletin, from High
Mistral. He preempted a dream to tell me that a large army is massing at
Jordan's Cave. They keep looking to the west and rattling their sabers."

"How many " from Mike. (I was twice as pleased that no one had asked if
it couldn't have been only a continuation of my dream.It's nice to be
respected by men like these .)

" `Names of Names,' was the phrase he used analogously speaking, of
course. He said their vibes stank."

"Why the hell are we heading south  The tunnels must be . . ."

"Small detour. The armory. I want to pick up some firepower."

Wendell looked startled. "I thought you'd given up the sword, Isham."

"Sure. But if I go to dicker with a man who wears one, I will, too. It
keeps him from slaying you out of hand, and it's peachy for
misdirection. Or self-defense."

"Oh," he said, and Mike nodded.

The truck raced downtown, paced by a five-Name battalion of Muskies.

 


  CHAPTER SIXTEEN

We left New York through Harlem, the only route we knew for sure was
clear. Only it wasn't, entirely. A panel truck that Mike had jacked up
out of the way had fallen over again, blocking access to the bridge.
Wendell remained in the truck while Mike and I jumped out to fix things.
It was while we were setting the jack that I smelled them.

I straightened quickly, and Mike looked up in surprise. "Grey Brother,"
I whispered, and by then he could hear them.

There were hundreds of them, a vast army that chittered and scurried.
They came from the river banks and from the deserted ghetto itself,
around smashed autos and through mounds of bones. We had seen occasional
packs on our way through Harlem, but nothing approaching this number.
Some were the size of tomcats. They were like a great grey carpet of death.

A flamethrower was beside me in the truckbed. It might even be operable.
There were incendiary grenades, and a comparatively inefficient but
psychologically-appealing Browning spray-gun. I kept my hand at my side,
palm open, and faced the army of rats.

 

(Ho, grey brother,)I something-more-than-thought.(I am returned. You
cost me an arm, some days past.) 

(Let there be peace among us.) 

 

There was no response that I could detect. But they watched in silent
stillness as we completed the removal of the wreck, climbed into the
ancient cab and drove north. Mike was white and sweating as we pulled
away, and Wendell's face was ashen.

"What did you say to them " Mike asked a few miles later.

"'Hello,'" I replied. "About all I could get across, I think. They're
even farther behind us than we are behind the High Muskies. But I
touched them."

"Good lord," Wendell breathed. "Can eventhat war be ended someday "

* * *

I made the best time I could, but after the second spare blew out it
took me twelve swearing hours to locate a usable tire in Kingston. It
was damn near twenty-four hours after we left Columbia that I halted for
the last time on the Interstate, five miles from Fresh Start. I killed
the headlights, left her idling, got out of the cab and fell flat on my
ass. I had been sitting in one position for along time.

Consequently, of course, the injured part was anesthetized, so I felt
little pain. I saw stars but then, it was five A.M.**under a cloudless
sky. After a long while I managed to get back up on my stilts, and
swayed like a half-sawn tree. It was difficult walking with my
knee-joints locked, but I managed it until I felt I could stay upright
unbraced. The two older men meanwhile followed my example with much more
circumspection, and made a much better job of it.

"The equipment's back home," Wendell said, limping up to join me.

"Don't need none o' them fancy doodads," I drawled. "Do it all right in
muh own haid. Oh, High Mistral could get his body here quicker if there
was an EM carrier for him to home on but I want to know what he sees
fromup there ."

He nodded. I pulled out a joint and lit it. Mike came up in time to take
the next toke, and as he passed it back to me Wendell intercepted it and
took a hit himself. We made no comment; and the three of us smoked in
silence for a few minutes. Then I sat down and hurled myself skyward.

* * *

I was a Pre-Exodus airline pilot, looking down at a living city by
night. Below, against utter blackness, a million pinpoints of light
shone like reflections of the stars on some vast puddle, but grouped in
patterns that showed human purpose. The lights were human minds,selves
. There were two groups: one that represented the sleeping population of
Northtown, and a much larger, more closely bunched nebula that was the
Agro Army.

It lay immediately to the east, moving slowly over the top of the East
Mountain toward the Nose. I watched it for a timeless while,
understanding it as an entity, empathizing to the point where I felt I
could predict its course and purpose. It tasted vaguely like Jordan.

I studied the whole double-cluster, made extrapolations. They were bad.
I stepped up the magnification and tried tasting individualselves . It
was oddly difficult so much of me was mingled with High Mistral that
theselves I perceived were weirdly out of focus like trying to
recognize a favorite poem from a translation into a strange language. It
had nothing to do with the fact that the minds I touched were mostly
asleep that should have made the subconscious clearer than ever. Was
that Krishnamurti  Yes, it seemed so. He was awake, quite excited, and
deeply angry. That one there was Jordan for sure, and that one was Helen
Phinney, sleeping fitfully.

There were three that startled me for a moment they consisted, in part,
of slightly distorted reflections of my ownself . One was Alia, of
course. But who were the others  Who in Fresh Start loved me that much 
I put it aside; the sum total of several dozen tastings suddenly
tabulated itself and shrieked for my attention. Technos were waking up
by the dozens, spraying feverish clouds of emotion, and the Agros too
reached a peak of excitement.

The battle of Fresh Start was nigh.

Leaving a thought-flash for High Mistral that might have taken a day to
write out, I wrenched myself from my exalted plane and dove headlong
back into my skull.

* * *

The shock of returning to my body was much less severe this time. I
leaped to my feet and began running in circles around the truck. Wendell
and Mike stared at me, half-convinced I'd gone round the bend.

"Get your legs back in shape," I hollered. "We'll need to be spry pretty
soon."

We jogged until we felt the blood pounding in our calves and thighs,
then clambered aboard the truck again. It was coming dawn. "They're
going to take the Nose," I explained as we got under way. "It's sound
tactics they can command both sides of the tracks, and just throw mud
downhill until there ain't no more Fresh Start. Jordan's agood general."

"Collaci is too," Mike said over the roar of the abused engine. "Isn't
he prepared for such an obvious move "

"In a general way, yes but these boys came along quick and quiet, and
somehow or other none of our friendly neighbors tipped us off. Teach'
just found out they're coming, and it's too late to stop 'em now."

"Oh, boy!"

"Yep. Be a bloodbath, one way or another, unless we can head it off.
Christ, some of those poor stupid bastards are armed with pitchforks.
Here's my notion." I explained what I had worked out with High Mistral
on one plane of awareness while I had been reconnoitering on another.

"But surely Jordan has the Gate blocked," Mike objected, "if only from
the other direction."

"Hell, no," I disagreed. "Now that Dad's dead, he's not especially
interested in harming any people he just wants to burn Fresh Start to
the ground. He'd be just as happy if the folks all scampered out the
Gate and into the woods. But they won't," I added grimly.

Sure enough, there was no one near the Gate. The building itself wasn't
there apparently it had been the loud noise I'd heard from my jail cell
a few weeks back. There were Guards around, but when they saw us and
smelled the incredible number of Muskies they dove for cover. We smashed
through the actual gate without slowing, and turned neither right nor
left, plunging off the road and onto the field behind the school
building, on a direct beeline for Security HQ.

It was a helluva ride. The ground was uneven, and the shocks on the
truck were purely decorative. The gravel around the pond nearly killed
us and three Technos on foot, but I managed a four-wheel float that
carried us past them and between two massive willow trunks. Bark kissed
both door handles.

Six Names of Muskies entered and left my mind so quickly as to not
interfere with my driving.(Awaiting your orders) was all they said,
and I gave some to four Names.

There was a milling crowd of armed men and women clustered around behind
the security and administration buildings. Crude breastworks joining all
the buildings that fronted on the Nose had been recently erected, and
trained troops huddled behind them, nervously fingering their weapons. I
could see a flanking team trotting cross town, hoping to sneak into the
West Forest and make a surprise attack up the bridge of the Nose, but I
didn't think much of their chances. Fighting uphill sucks.

The top of the Nose was crawling with Agros, outlined against the dawn sky.

Collaci didn't think much of the flank attack either. As we arrived he
was putting his own energy into setting up mortar emplacements behind
Security HQ. He looked up to see us coming to a screeching halt, watched
the left front tire explode the moment we stopped, grinned briefly and
ran toward us.

From around in front of the building came the sound of megaphoned voices
being hurled up and down the mountainside.

"Teach'," I cried, jumping from the truck, "let me parley."

"What the hell are all those Muskies doing up there " he asked
suspiciously, eyes and nose on the skies.

"Remember the last time I parleyed for you " I shot back.

His eyes came back to me at once. They recognized Wendell, and widened.
"Let's go talk to Krish," he said, and spun on his heel.

Krishnamurti was kneeling behind the meager shelter of a pile of packing
crates in front of the jail, a battery-powered megaphone in his hand. We
ran broken-field to join him, but were not fired on. I saw George's face
at the barred side window as I passed, and ignored him.

". . . WAY I SEE IT," Jordan was bellowing through an old-fashioned
acoustic megaphone, "SO WHY DON'T WE TALK THIS OVER  WE BOTH REASONABLE
MEN; I DON'T WANNA HURT YO' LITTLE GIRL. WHITE FLAG MEETIN', JUS' YOU
AN' ME. WHAT YOU SAY "

Krishnamurti looked over his shoulder, did a triple-take when he saw me
and Wendell, then went inscrutable. "He knows something," Collaci told
him, jabbing a finger at me. "I think you should give him the squawkbox."

"Him '' 

"He won't sell us out, Sarwar," Collaci said simply. "I trust him."

Krishnamurti started, his jaw dropping. Without a word, he handed me the
megaphone. He smelled terrible.

I threw them both a grateful look. "I won't betray you," I lied with
great sincerity, and turned to face the Nose.First time in human memory
Teach' ever trusted someone, I thought wryly, and of course he's dead
wrong. 

"WHAT'S YO' ANSWER, TECHNO "

"THIS IS ISHAM STONE, JORDAN. THERE'LL BE THREE IN OUR PARTY." I
wondered if Teach' had noticed Mike's absence.

"SAID I'D SEE YOU AGAIN SOMEDAY, BOY. WHERE WE TALK "

"HALFWAY UP THE MOUNTAIN. BOTH SIDES STEP INTO VIEW AT A GIVEN SIGNAL.
BY THE TIME YOU REACH DECENT COVER YOU'LL BE IN GRENADE RANGE, SO I
GUESS I CAN TRUST YOU. BRING NO WEAPONS."

"I GOT YO' LADY, SO I GUESS I CAN TRUS' YOU. NO WEAPONS IT IS." He said
something off-mike, then, "OKAY. SAY WHEN."

"Keep your head down, Wendell," I ordered. "Anybody fromeither side
who recognizes you is liable to shoot." I hoped I was giving Mike enough
time. "NOW."

Krishnamurti, Collaci and I stepped from shelter. I threw down three
weapons, Krish dropped one, and Collaci dropped five. It was a tense
moment, and excellent time for a doublecross. We were upwind, so Jordan
knew almost at once who we were, whereas he could send four expendable
ringers and start blasting at once.

But my eyes and Collaci's immediately confirmed that Jordan was indeed
among the four who came into view at the top of the Nose. So was Alia.

I watched her carefully as she descended. Her arms were bound behind her
back, and Jordan held the bight of a slender wire that ended in a noose
around her throat. I saw no obvious signs of ill-treatment or
starvation, and relaxed a bit.

That reminded me to relax a bit more, so I began regularizing my
breathing. A calm came over me, and I seemed to see myself as from a
great height, one of a number of ants scurrying up and down a rock for
unimaginable ant-reasons. To be sure, I was about to literally help
decide the fate of a planet. But what of that What is man or Musky that
thou art mindful of them   

I was ready to dicker.

* * *

The climb took awhile.

We reached a place where slab boulders afforded cover from both sides,
and waited there. Jordan's party arrived almost at once. Alia preceded
him, and behind him followed the regulation two thugs, one thin and
middle-aged, one surly and young. They both smelled dirty. Jordan loomed
above us all.

He was dressed in the same clothes he had worn when I first met him, but
the long knife was conspicuously absent. But it was obvious that a sharp
yank from that powerful left arm would tighten the wire noose right
through Alia's jugular and carotids. He appeared and smelled supremely
calm and confident, which was just the way I was feeling. I winked at
Alia, and she smiled serenely in reply.

"Figured you was around when I smelled all them sky-devils," Jordan said
to me. "Seem like they listen to you now."

"Well, Jordan," Krishnamurti rasped, out of breath from the long climb,
"what's your offer "

"Real simple, my man, real simple. You an' all yo' progress-lovers get
an hour to clear out. Then I burn the place. After we finish toastin'
marshmallows, you get yo' daughter back alive."

I've got to hand it to Krish. He stood right up to the giant. "Don't be
a jackass, Jordan. I can't possibly agree to that, daughter or no
daughter. Alia knows better and so should you."

"I told him," she said quietly, and Jordan yanked at her leash. I took a
firm hold on my own.

"You've got the advantage of position," Collaci pointed out, inserting a
toothpick lazily into his mouth, "but we've gotlots more firepower.
You can pour troops down into Southtown without our even being aware of
it but then we've been mining it and booby-trapping it pretty heavily in
the last week, and the only map is in my head."

"Yes," I put in, "but he has a fuel train of many, many, many gallons
stashed about five thousand yards east of here, smell-shielded, and
enough covering fire to get most of it strung out along the whole length
of the Nose." Collaci and Jordan stared at me, no doubt deducing the
source of my information. "The fire of God could rain down on us from
the heavens without an Agro leaving the mountain. Of course, our mortars
could give Jordan some trouble. The pointis , gentlemen, that if it is
battle you want, it looks like being a bloody one. A Pyrrhic victory for
whoever's left at the end."

"I don't want no battle," Jordan growled. "I don't even want to harm one
soul. But if you gentlemen can't see your way clear to takin' my offer,
I'll jus' naturally cut this lady's throat an' get on with the battlin'."

"You continue to put too much store in the tradition of hostage
holding," Collaci answered calmly. "This time Krish here understands
that the stakes are just too high."

"You both put too much store in violent solutions," I cut in. "I believe
it's time to announce my mutual disarmament proposal."

I stood on one foot, twisted my right heel ninety degrees clockwise and
brought it down hard before anyone could stop me. Behind me to the
northwest, there was a sound like a dragon coughing. I hoped Mike had
been able to clear folks away from the Tool Shed.

"What the hell was that " everyone asked at once.

"Excuse me," I said, and rolled up my eyes.

(Now, my brothers!) 

Excited shouts came distantly from two directions.

"What kind of shit is this " Jordan snapped."What'd you do "  

I unrolled my eyes and opened them slowly. I showed Jordan my back
teeth. "Defanged both sides," I said cheerfully.

"Explain!" Collaci rapped.

"That noise was a shaped charge I palmed on you, Teach'. It blew the
loading dock off the Tool Shed, which sort of opens it to the general
public." Teach' swore, explosively and filthily. Krish glared at Teach'.
"Jordan's fuel train was already kind of open-air. Right now partisans
of both sides are being dismayed and consternated to discover that their
most essential assets are crawling with about sixty or seventy Muskies
apiece. Those Muskies can stay there forever, if need be and if
anybody's stupid enough to fire on them, or if I tell them to suicide,
the resulting explosion'll wreck the eggs."

"Double cross," Jordan snarled.

"What it is, folks, is the first sit-in since the Exodus. And I'm happy
to say I've got the drop on all of you. Better stop the fight."

There was a shocked pause, in which the sound of distant shouting was
clearly audible again. We heard no gunshots, but someone could lose his
nerve at any moment.

"HOLD YOUR FIRE," Jordan and Collaci bellowed together, and the shouting
stopped.

"My god," Krishnamurti cried, "are youmad   Don't you know the
equipment in that Tool Shed isvital  "

"To what  The lives of men and women  That's what you're proposing
tospend on them."

Krish fumed on almost incoherently, but I was watching Jordan.

He must have been just as shaken as Krish by the sudden disappearance of
his only chance to destroy Fresh Start without a protracted struggle
that would cost Pan most of his congregation. But he wasn't showing a thing.

"Where you at, boy " he rumbled, cutting Krish off. "I don't figure yo'
action. Whatyou sellin' "

"Peace," I said earnestly. "Peace and the notion that we can work out
literally any dispute if we can all manage to keep from killing each
other while we're doing it. We're repeating a pattern of madness that
lay upon the world for countless centuries before the Exodus andwe can
break that pattern now."  

"What you mean " Jordan asked.

"You and my father disagreed on how the world should be rebuilt. So you
set up two political parties and agreed to be lifelong enemies. Along
the fringes of both camps, some communication took place but I'm the
first hardcore Techno you've spoken to since you left Fresh Start, and
you're the first hard-core Agro I've ever spoken with in my life.

"Can we say that our differences can never be resolved Can we say we
have even tried "  

Jordan blinked.

"What are you proposing " Collaci asked.

"A chance for all the fights to stop `keepin' on a-comin,' Teach'. All
of you must have guessed by now that I'm in contact with the High
Muskies. With their aid, we can make what Jordan calls `the smelly
place' this hunk of real estate we're standing on a very unsmelly place.
Safe, from a medical rather than military standpoint. Clean, the way
technology always should have been.

"It will then become essential that we have the wisdom and influence of
a pantheist like Jordan."

"What " chorused Collaci, Jordan, Krish and Alia, each in a different
tone of voice.

"With air pollution gone and by the way, quite a lot of what is now
water pollution could be turned into Musky-food at very low cost one of
the few natural controls on technological progress will go. It won't be
such an obvious physical nuisance anymore, and so we may take even
longer than ever to perceive its psychological and psychic nuisance
effect." Krish and Collaci looked blank. "Have you gentlemen actually
forgotten what the world was like just before Exodus  I didn't live
through those years, but I sure heard about 'em. They were a time of
mass insanity, of social institutions and human values shoveled like
coal into the boiler of progress with a capital P. Every human furthered
his or her own self-interest even, toward the end, to the exclusion of
mate and children and became bitter and frustrated when he learned that
the best this cultural imperative could give him was more than he
wanted, needed, or could cope with.

"We tried to grow too fast, and in any direction at all. We don't dare
recreate the world we once had, lest we drive another good man to
madness. It was not my father's nose that made him visit the Hyperosmic
Plague on the world. It was his soul. It cried within him at a whole
world growing too fast for itself to bear, in order to stoke an immense
and complex machine that fed a few at the expense of many. Why, do you
know what Dad's last job was Biological warfare. Making people sick as
a strategic policy. No wonder he destroyed his world.

"Jordan can provide the necessary counterpressure to keep us in balance
with the planet we're living on, to remind us that we belong in harmony
with our world. Just cleaning up the gases we breathe won't do that. He
can help us redesign Fresh Start to put it more in harmony with the
world we're trying to save you must admit that the presence of so many
dissatisfied customers here today is a hard lesson to overlook. I know
you feel a need to expand there's things weneed yet that we haven't
got. But I tell you there will come a day when we have expanded enough,
when we have Progressed as far as we should for the times. And I have a
hunch that day might come about midway between when you think it is and
when Jordan thinks it is.

"You know steel and glass; Jordan knows earth and water. We must all
knowboth sides, if we are to rebuild a world worth living in.

"And you, Jordan," I went on steadily. "You speak of steel and glass as
the crutch used by `weak life-stuff,' that `Pan woulda scrapped an'
started over.' Don't you see that those are fair weapons for life to use
in struggling for survival  A man whose body grew too infirm for him to
continue as a warrior once wrote a book that turned literally thousands
of people on to Pan. He called it `grokking.' Don't you see that in the
kind of world you say you want, most people would be working too hard
and suffering too much to grok a damned thing, let alone teach each
other how  Don't hate us for what we don't know teach us. 

"We can strike a balance, and we can make it work. Or you folks can have
your battle if you really feel you must but ifI hear any shooting
today, my Muskies will self-destruct. You pays the lives of your people
and you takes your choice.

"Now, why don't we all go home to my place and have scrambled eggs "

There was a long silence. I scratched my stump, which was aching for
some reason, and caught my breath while I watched them all think. Krish
looked highly skeptical, but he was thinking about it.

It was Jordan who broke the silence. "Well, you doublecrossed me good,
boy, in a way I wasn't expecting . . . but I guess my triple cross still
works.Slim! Eddie! "

Skinny and Surly reached over their shoulders, and their hands came down
with knives in them.

Collaci and I might have been mirror images. Our right arms blurred and
two knives whipped across the intervening distance, turned over a
careful one and a half times and struck the two Agros hilt-first in the
forehead. The Armory commando knife got Surly, and the older Marine
issue got Skinny. Both dropped in their tracks.

Collaci and I glanced at each other briefly, a flicker-glance in which a
lifetime spiritual agreement was made between us. " `The serene mind
avoids killing,' " he quoted briefly, and then we were confronting Jordan.

"Quadruple cross, and we're even," I announced.

"Shit we are," Jordan barked. His right hand came around from his back
pocket with a crude pistol, a private enterprise Musky-gun. "Brought
this in case some o' yo' damn sky-devils come along, Stone boy," he said
with satisfaction, "but they ain't any in smell. I reckon it'll put a
hole in any o' you that come close. Now you call off yo' friggin' sit-in
right quick, or I cut yo' lady's throat."

"No!" Krish cried in spite of himself.

"I mean it," the big man yelled, his voice rising. "Worst that happen, I
lose my fuel train, but you Technos lose half yo' tek-knowledge-y then I
clean up the rest."

My heart turned to ice within me. Icould not give him what he
demanded and I knew from his eyes that he was mad enough to kill Alia
and the rest of us and take his chances on a bloody battle.

I stamped my foot on the ground hard and leaned on it, rolling my eyes
heavenward.

(Please.) 

And High Mistral was at Jordan's face before he could move. The
sky-rider was too thin and insubstantial to smell until he had plunged
into our midst, but his psychic aura had the impact of a bass chord from
some shatteringly vast pipe organ. It shook me, and I was not the focus
of its aim. The aged Musky struck at Jordan with the multilevel
awareness that was his alien mind, conveying on a hundred levels one
overriding, undeniable emotion.

Love.

Jordan shrieked, wasting the air in his lungs, and flung gun and wire
rope blindly from him. At once High Mistral retreated to a distance,
ignoring the strong north wind. The big Agro sobbed and fell to his knees.

"I'm sorry, Lord Pan," he gasped as he wept. "I didn't know . . . they
was . . . your creatures too."

(ALL VIOLENCE) I "heard," (CAN BE AVOIDED BY THE TRULY SERENE MIND.)

(If it's got a right heel to home in on,) I sent back dazedly. (Thank
you, elder brother.)

And then I ran to my woman.

We were embracing and saying inane things when my subconscious
identified some small sounds they'd been picking up from behind me.
Someone was coming slowly up the mountain toward us. I turned, expecting
to see Wendell, and for one awful second I knew for certain that I had
blown every fuse. My heart literally faltered, and there was a roaring
in my ears.

"Hello, Isham," my father said. "This time you have truly done well."

"Thanks," I whispered, and fainted dead away.

 


  CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Somewhere in there my self tried to go to a place from which it would
not be able to find its way back.

But a swarm of Muskies prevented it, and stayed with it until it was well.

Their name was Mistral.

* * *

I opened my eyes.

My own bedroom. Late afternoon. Lying on my own bed for the first time
since forever. There was my guitar. There was my bookshelf and the twin
speakers. There was my hookah.

There was Dad.

It's all been a dream, that's it . . . 

Nuts. 

"Hi, Dad."

"Hello, son."

Neither one of us spoke again for a long while. I was studying him,
looking for something I could not name. I was a long time looking. It's
curiously difficult to actually see your father's face, I found you tend
to assume it. But I made the effort, and found whatever it was I was
looking for, knew all at once the identity of the last of the three
selves in whom I had seen reflections of my own (Collaci, I'd learned on
the mountainside, was the second).

By damn, my old man loved me very much. Why hadn't I ever seen that before 

"You're looking good, for a corpse."

"Don't try to get up. You rolled a way downhill after you fell, and gave
your head a nasty crack."

"Wouldn't dream of it. I was thinking of skipping school today."

That got a quick smile, gone in an instant. It got me thinking that I'd
like to see another. "Dad "

"Yes "

"I'm delighted to see that the reports of your death were exaggerated."

This smile was huge, but it dissolved in moments into tears, and we
embraced awkwardly. "I'm sorry, Isham," he sobbed brokenly. "Oh, son,
I'm sorry."

I discovered that I was weeping too, just as loud. "I felt justshitty
without a father," I managed, and then I could not speak for crying. We
held each other and bawled together for a very long time. It brought
me and him, I knew back to the night Mama died.Thefamily's back
together again, I thought crazily, and wept anew.

Finally we disengaged and blew our noses. The honking produced enough
comic relief to get us both grinning like idiots, and I decided to turn
my mind to practical matters before it melted into mush. "Did you hear
my proposal to Jordan "

He sobered. "I heard the whole performance as I ran from Sarwar's home.
He was wired for sound."

"How do you feel about my proposal "

"Like a damned fool. If I had had your wisdom when I was your age, or
evenmy age . . . yes, by all means, let there be peace. I don't want
to rebuildeverything I destroyed."

"Where's Jordan "

"Gone. After you'd been carried back downhill, I went to him. I begged
his pardon for closing my mind to him for so many years, for assuming an
uneducated ex-Techno had nothing to teach me, and asked him to join the
Council. He was like a man who'd been sandbagged; I wasn't sure he'd
heard me. Then he looked up, and his mask was soggy, and he begged my
pardon right back. He was so sincere he startled me. He offered to meet
the Council over breakfast tomorrow, to `discuss how he could best help
us,' and I said that would be just fine. Your . . . your friend High
Mistral . . . er . . . gave us**to understand that he would also attend
the conference. Then Jordan shook my hand and left, still looking
sandbagged, and within ten minutes there wasn't an Agro left on the
Nose. Did your Musky friend do all that to him, son "

"No way," I said. "Jordan did it himself. All he had to do was decide to
be afraid, and High Mistral couldn't have touched his mind at all. Since
he's a brave man, the old plasmoid was able to get inside and give him a
massive dose of the thing whose lack had twisted him, the thing he'd
thought he could never have with a bad joke for a face: love. High
Mistral forgave Jordan for being bitter; Jordan did the rest alone." I
was suddenly very tired.

Dad shook his head. "I hope he feels the same tomorrow morning. Sarwar
says I'm insane to trust him."

"He will," I said positively. "When you've waited as long as he has for
hope to come back, you don't let it go. Dad "

"Yes "

"How's Helen "

He smiled suddenly. "Very well indeed."

"She thought you were dead, too."

"So did everyone but Sarwar."

"A pretty dirty trick."

"I know. I can't for the life of me understand why she's agreed to marry
me."

"Dad! That'swonderful! That's . . . sufferin' Jesus, that's terrific.
Congratulations, man, congratulations." My head swam, but the fatigue
that lay on me lessened some. "I hope you'll both be very happy. I've
been wanting to build me a house of my own for a while now."

"You'll always be welcome here, son."

"Not with a family of my own. Alia's carrying my baby."

He blinked violently. And then he smiled again. "It looks as though the
congratulations are mutual, Isham."

It was all too much. I hadn't exchanged this much juice with my father
in all my twenty years, and while it felt good, the unfamiliar intensity
was exhausting. There were a thousand questions I wanted to ask, and the
sheer weight of them made my eyelids suddenly heavy.

"Gonna fall asleep," I said faintly. "Hey Dad. What did George say when
he saw you "

"Hollered for five minutes about how nobody tells him nothing around
this goddamned place, and then he shook my hand. He said to tell you
he's sorry, by the way. Er . . . Helen still bears traces of a grudge,
but I'm sure she'll come around."

"I'm sure she will," I agreed groggily. "Me too."

"We all will, sooner or later," Dad said, "Now sleep."

I slept.

* * *

(High Mistral )

(YES, ISHAM )

(Why did it take our races so long to get together  We could have used
you, the past couple thousand years.)

(AND WE YOU. A MINIMUM POPULATION IS NEEDED FOR SATISFACTORY
((untranslatable))ING. THANKS TO YOU, WE CAN NOW MAINTAIN THAT LEVEL,
AND OUR ((untranslatable)) WILL BE ((untranslatable)). BOTH RACES WERE
SLOW TO PERCEIVE THEIR NEED, AND NEITHER COULD HAVE KNOWN THAT THE OTHER
FILLED IT.)

(What you need is always there. Just a matter of finding it.)

(SO IWE BELIEVE.)

(Nice working with you, pal.)

(LIKEWISE.)

(See you tomorrow.)

(IT ISWILL BE WELL.)

* * *

I was sitting in a comfortable chair by a crackling fire that warmed the
autumn night. It felt inexpressibly good to be back home, to know that
you Can Go Home Again, and find it a better place than you left it.
Mike, Krishnamurti, Collaci and Wendell were ranged about the room in
other armchairs, and Alia was at my side. Helen was at the chapel,
praying, and I was sure she wasn't alone.

"So youdid have a sense of smell all these years," I said wonderingly.

Standing by the fireplace, back to us, Dad nodded. "How else would I
have detected the bomb in the bathroom  I triggered it with a broom
handle and thought hard for several hours before going to see Sarwar. I
had been horrified at the loss of your arm, and when I realized the only
reason you could have for setting such a trap I had my nose literally
rubbed in the fact that it had been my own fault.

"Then I found and played your tape recording.

"I believed that if you learned I had not been killed after all, you
would return and stalk me again no doubt with better success. And so I
crept through the dark to Sarwar's home and told him to announce my
successful murder." Krish shuddered at the memory. "Since Alia no longer
lives at home, I was able to stay out of sight in his attic for weeks,
totally alone, eating whatever he brought me. I was trying to come to
terms with myself.

"In that time I finally confronted the insanity I had committed upon you.

"You see, son, I never believed for a moment in all these twenty years
that Wendell was actually still alive. I had left him unconscious in his
laboratory and was convinced I had killed him. I struck him quite hard.

"But I knew that the world would need a target for its horror and fury,
and there was a chance that the Hyperosmic Virus could be traced to me.
To protect myself, I concocted the story of the archvillain living in exile.

"It seemed only a natural extrapolation of my lie that I should raise up
my only son to kill the villain I had created. May God forgive me, son,
I used you as an object, a brace to shore up a topheavy lie. I suppose I
expected that you would eventually return from New York with the news
that Wendell was nowhere to be found. That would have allowed me to
reluctantly declare him dead and lay to rest a ghost that had long
outlived its usefulness."

"And instead," Wendell said gently, "Isham has raised two ghosts to
life." He and Dad exchanged a glance.

"But why did Krish sic Collaci on me, and why didn't you step forward
after I first talked to the Council " I asked.

"Sarwar was trying to force me from my isolation in his attic by having
you brought back. Since you had to be publicly fetched, he had to hold a
Council. Although I refused to sit on it, Sarwar's plan nearly worked. I
decided I would come to your cell that night at midnight. And then when
Jordan attacked Fresh Start and carried off you and Alia, and Dr. Gowan
disappeared with our only truck, I realized how grossly I had neglected
my responsibilities while reflecting on my sins toward you, bathing in
new and old guilt. I decided my best move was to make a dramatic public
reappearance, with just the right timing to defuse the coming violence.
For the second time, Jordan moved before I was ready."

He turned to face me, meeting my eyes squarely. "All of which only
proves that I am too damned old and stupid to keep on bossing this town
by myself. Letalone negotiating a relationship with several thousand
plasmoids. Will you help me, son  Will you help us all "

All eyes in the room were now on me.

"I'll help you all I can, Dad," I told him. "So will Wendell. So will
Jordan. We'll all help."

"Yes, we will," Wendell agreed.

The tension went out of his shoulders, and his eyes were softer than I'd
ever known them. He came forward, and Wendell and I both rose to meet
him. We three embraced, for a long time. When I looked around, Mike and
Teach' and Alia were grinning like demented pumpkins.

I found that I was too.

"Well, people," I said happily, "we've got a treaty to work out with
some plasmoids. I volunteer to be interpreter. But for ambassadors, I
nominate Wendell Morgan Carlson and the elder Stone."

And a cheer went up from the other four.

* * *

An hour later the congregation had dwindled down to Dad and Alia and me,
and we were getting sleepy ourselves.

"Well," Dad was asking, "what are you going to call the baby "

"Jacob Wendell Stone," Alia said at one, "or Anne, after my mother." I
nodded.

"Make it `Wendell Jacob,' " he said, and I nodded again. After a second
Alia did too.

He yawned, and the two of us of course did too. "That's the sign," he
said. "Good night, you two."

I stood and hugged him again, and Alia kissed him on the cheek. "Good
night, Dad," I said. "Don't worry the world's getting steadily better.
Even Teach' has achieved his lifelong ambition he's unemployed. Why, you
can even start smoking your pipe again if you want to."

"Eh " 

"Forgot to tell you; half of the Hyperosmic Plague is wearing off its
victims. We still have supersensitive noses but the suppressor mechanism
is starting to come back."

"You're joking."

"I lived in New York for weeks without plugs. After the first few hours
it was tolerable. In a day or two I began forgetting that it smelled bad
at all. And that's in a city over which the High Muskies were somehow
maintaining an efficient heat sink, that they'd been using for twenty
years as a pollution pantry. Mike could have done it too if he'd had to,
or believed he could."

He shook his head. "Too much for one day."

"It's not important. The point is that things are getting better all the
time."

"They are at that," he agreed, and started to leave. He paused and
frowned. "One thing I don't look forward to is having breakfast with
Jordan tomorrow morning. Will you cover for me, son "

"Not a chance."

"Oh, I know he has a valid viewpoint, and I concede I could learn much
from him. I'll make a genuine attempt to learn from him, too. But the
man is such an infernal jackass."

"Dad," I said very gently, "so are you. So am I. So is every person I
have ever met, seen or heard of. Only a jackass could have released the
Hyperosmic Virus, and only a jackass could have spent his left arm and
endless weeks of head banging to learn the simple repeated lesson that
fear breeds violence, which don't breed nothing at all but bones.
Everybody that ever walked or rode the wind has been a jackass, to X
degree, for X periods of his life. But if there's one thing you and I
are learning, it's that you've got to learn to live with all those other
jackasses, somehow.

"Or else you'll have to die with them."

 


  EPILOGUE

I became aware that I was lying on my left side, my head socketed in the
place between Alia's neck and her firm shoulder. My right ear ached from
cold, my feet and hand were numb, my side was stiff, my stump hurt
abominably in its harness, and I had to piss something awful. I felt
wonderful.

Alia was still in the undermind. I wouldn't have disturbed her if a
snake had crawled up my pants. I lay where I was and tasted my joy,
marveled at how close it was to pain, realized that in the past night I
had climbed another proud and humble step up the ladder of evolution. I
felt the bittersweet wistfulness that always comes after one of those
exalted moments when you are granted a hazy intuition of the answers to
the Big Questions, likewhat is all this doing here  andwhy am I here
perceiving it  andwhat will it be like to die  or at least the
certainty that thereare answers, that everything matters. The
wistfulness always follows such moments because that's when you realize
that memory banks can't retain moments like that, when you realize that
you'll have to keep recreating that certainty again and again, seeking
it all your life.

She stirred, and I lifted my weight off her with my new left arm. Our
gazes locked for a long moment, and we didn't take the trouble to smile
with our faces. Then she did, so I did too.

"I don't remember leaving the house," she said.

"Me either, but it seems we must have."

"Let's pee," she said practically, so we did. It's nice to have two
hands for trouser buttons.

The morning was cold and blustery, earmuff and scarf weather, and we had
neither. I took off my coat and put it on Alia and we beat it for the
house. We were laughing like turkeys by the time we got inside. Not only
was relief from the wind welcome, we discovered that we still had a fire
going in the big Ashley, and a few chunks of maple later we were
entirely thawed. Alia put the triangle on the Ashley and set the
coffeepot on it, and I built a fire in the kitchen stove for breakfast,
humming as I chopped the kindling. We had finished a ridiculous quantity
of sausage and eggs and coffee before either of us felt the need to
speak a word.

Alia put down her fork and looked thoughtful. "Isham . . . that was
mostly me, wasn't it "

I nodded.

"I thought you were the family alpha-master."

I grinned and shook my head. "You've got it all wrong, Madonna. I know
your alpha-rating is nothing spectacular, but it takes more than alpha
to make a telempath."

"A what "

"Telempath. That's what Mike calls me and himself, now. A telempath is a
person who approaches telepathy by way of empathy. What was once called
an Enlightened Man if only for flashes. High alpha potentialplus a
high degree of empathyplus a lifelong drive to escape the boundaries
of my skull combined to make me a telempath, a man a High Musky could
and would talk to."

"But how didI . . ."

"I have just invented a new scale, whose measurements can so far only be
intuited. I call it the Empathy Scale. On a scale of ten, with me at ten
and a turnip at zero, you would rate . . . oh, let's see . . . about fifty."

"Oh." One of the manylittle things I love about my beloved is that she
accepts a compliment well.

"I connected with you, then connected us both with High Mistral. But it
wasyou who connected us all with little Wendell. Mistral and I
wouldn't have known where to look. How to look. You know whatever it is
I mean."

"Yes." Her eyes got a faraway look. "God, Isham. He's so little. And so.
. . fierce."

"Ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny. At this point in his evolution, he
needs to be."

She nodded slowly. "Walk me to the smithy," she asked.

"The smithy can wait. The embassy leaves today, remember "

"Wow, I forgot. It's Monday."

"Better shake a leg or we'll miss them."

"Isham  I know it's easier to talk in the undermind without the chatter
of other minds, but why go all the way to New York  They could truck
that machine of Michael's closer to home."

"Whose home "

"Eh "

"You were there at the Pond, the day after the War ended. You heard Dad
speak to upwards of four hundred people Agros and Technos telling them
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. You saw the crowd
look at Wendell, and you've seen them looking at him for two weeks now.
It doesn't matter what they know with their heads, darling. In their
hearts Wendell Morgan Carlson is the lifelong symbol of evil, the
ultimately hated man. You may have also seen Wendell looking back at the
crowd that day, trembling. Crowds freak him out, and no wonder. New York
is Wendell's home for now, at least. He'll have to build a tolerance to
this many people, and they to him."

"The poor old man."

"Poor old man, my eye. He invented the undermind. He's given the race
the greatest gift it's had in a couple thousand years, and he has the
satisfaction of knowing it. If he doesn't have a mind tolive with the
race, the fact that it ain't sorry to see him go is largely irrelevant.
He's no Moses. He's a man who's upset by people perhaps he's been
hanging around Muskies too long. Give him time. Give Fresh Start time.
They'll fall in love if they aren't thrown at each other by their mutual
friends."

She nodded. "I guess you're right."

"Can't undo eighteen years overnight. Let's go." We bundled up and left
the house. We walked along the Lake shore, cut through the woods past
Dad and Helen's place, which was empty. Dawn was just turning the clouds
purple from underneath, and the wind was mostly from the south.Two
weeks ago, I thought,that would have called for noseplugs. Good old
Muskies. Superb janitors. And they sho' can dance.  

* * *

We strolled down Main Street, hand in hand. People were beginning to
stir in the dormitories; smoke was already twisting from the chimneys as
the kitchen crews made ready for breakfast. We heard a baby cry
somewhere in the Statler, and grinned together. Mrs. Wilson was just
opening the General Store as we went by, and gave us a cheery wave.
"Lovely day," she called out happily.

We left the road at the corner of First Avenue, passing behind Security
HQ, and paused for a while at the Pond, watching ripples chase each
other in the schizoid breeze. It was indeed a lovely day. I was still
dazed from the shock of telempathic contact with my unborn son, but it
was the sort of daze that makes you more aware of the world rather than
less. I felt kinship with the big weeping willows and the Pond and the
breeze itself. My consciousness was more than planetary it seemed
universal. Alia was as much a part of me as my ribcage.

We entered the Ad Building by the back entrance, stopped to listen to
Dan O'Connor botch the morning news and weather, and were heading down a
corridor toward the front exit when we heard voices raised in anger.

". . . can't you get that through your ugly head " came Krishnamurti's
voice from the Planning Office next to us. We stopped walking.

"Why you pigheaded Hindu!" Jordan's unmistakable baritone blazed.
"Anybody but a shit-for-brains could see that gettin' our diet together
is mo' important than some kinda sunpower jive. Or don't you . . ."

I knocked and entered, grinning broadly.The Mayor tours City Hall.
"Good morning, gentlemen."

The two looked sheepish. "Morning, Isham."

"Mornin'."

"Isn't it a little early for you two to be at it "

They both began speaking at once, and I waved them to silence. "What's
up, Jordan "

"This fathead wants t' put our juice into more power instead o'
greenhouses, an' winter roun' the corner."

"But a solar power plant would make the methane converters obsolete, you
imbecile," my father-in-law snapped. "Then you'd have unlimited
fertilizer for your damned greenhouses."

"Human shit gotta be composted at leas' a year, meatbrain."

"Hold it," I cut in. "You're both right. Jordan, those methane
converters havebig slop-slopes. The stuff that comes out the
bottomis a year old or better. Krish, wedo need greenhouses, and
soon unless you want scurvy again this winter. Rose hips won't grow in
snow."

"But we can't do both," Krishnamurti complained. "We can't spare more
than twenty people, and either project would take that many."

"Seems like Technos'd be the last choice to build a greenhouse program.
Jordan, why don't you recruit some of your Agros  The employment rate
for guerrillas is terrible these days."

"Where they gon' live Winter comin' on, dammit."

"I know where you could house twenty men right now, with a day's work or
so."

"Where "

"The hot-shot factory."

"Oh."Both men got thoughtful looks. After a minute they started,
looked at each other and headed for the big map on the conference table.
"How much prime shit can you deliver " Jordan asked.

"Well . . ." Krishnamurti began, and I grinned. They wouldn't be at each
other's throats for at least an hour now.I'm a goodmayor. Far out.  

"Father," Alia said, speaking for the first time.

"Yes, Alia " He pulled his attention from the map.

"I've got a problem for you two Planners. You too, Isham."

"What's that ''

"Collaci.''

No one asked what problem she meant. Within a very few days of the
Battle of Fresh Start, Teach' had begun to mope. I'd gotten drunk with
him once and stoned with him twice without effect, and two days ago he'd
gotten up from his desk, locked the empty and obsolete Security
headquarters, and taken to the woods. His house still stood empty.

"I confess I have no solution," Krishnamurti said, his eyes pained.
"What use is a general in peacetime "

"That Collaci is a lot of man," Jordan declared. "Seem like they ought
to be some kinda work for him. He need to be useful."

"I love Teach'," I said sadly, "but I'm goddamned if I can see how we
can use him efficiently. I offered him a job teaching philosophy while
Mike's away, but he said he'd probably find himself kicking the shit out
of his students out of pure reflex. He's no good at chaperoning drunks
and wife beaters either what he is, he's the best killer in the world,
and we just don't need one."

"He could boss the hunting crew," Jordan suggested, rubbing a hand
across his mouth. "We be needin' lotsa meat when the cold come."

"Mmmm close. But it feels like a Band-Aid on a slashed artery, like that
teaching job. Teach' needs challenge, not makework."

"Isham," Alia said suddenly, "he's not what you said."

"Eh "

"He's not the world's best killer. That's what the times required him to
be. Collaci is the world's best survivor."

I blinked.

"By God, you're right," Krishnarnurti said.

"And where does Fresh Start need a survivor-type " she went on.

"Where " Jordan asked.

"Out there," said Krishnamurti, waving at the window, and his daughter
smiled.

"Huh "

"What do we know about the world " Krish asked. "There's no one on the
airwaves but us all we know about anything more than a hundred miles in
any direction is hearsay and rumor from occasional wandering travelers,
and the stories they tell are wildly inconsistent. It appears that there
may be a kingdom of some sort growing in the Deep South somewhere, and
we know virtually nothing about it. We need another Balboa, another
Lewis and Clark, another Livingston. We need a survivor."

"That's not all we need," Alia said. "We need a missionary. Someone has
to spread the news that the War is over that men can and must live with
Muskies."

"She's right," I told Krish. "It's all very well to Save Lower New York
State. But sooner or later we're just going to have to up and Save the
World. And we can't do that if we don't know a damned thing about it.
Old Buddhist notion,hiniyana andmahayana : small boat and big boat.
You either become a hermit and try to get enlightened, or you go out and
try to get everybody enlightened. We've spent the eighteen years since
the world sank in perfecting and tightening up our lifeboat now it's
time to look around for other lifeboats, and for drowning men in need of
one."

"Of course," Krishnamurti said wonderingly. "For eighteen years I've
been certain that India survived, perhaps better than we, but there
never seemed to be time to . . . but there is time, now." His eyes went
far away.

"China survived," Jordan asserted. "Bet they could teach us plenty."

"We don't know if California survived," I said dryly. "But it's time we
found out. Teach' ain't superfluous he's our Most Valuable Player. Okay,
as Acting Mayor of Fresh Start I order myself to take a couple days off
and go offer Teach' an explorer's commission, give him a . . . uh . . .
missionary position. I hate like hell to start my administration by
cutting school, but I don't believe anyone else could track Teach' but
me. Will you two cover for me " I put just the least shade of emphasis
on the "you two."

They glared at each other like rival tomcats, and Alia and I burst out
laughing. They glared at us, and then at each other again, and then they
broke up too. "We try to keep it together," Jordan said, laughing, and
gathered the three of us in his great arms.

"Now design me a solar power plant and a couple greenhouses," I said
awhile later. "We've got to go say goodbye to the road company." We left
the two Planning Chiefs bent over the map, and got as far as the
hallway. I paused then, sent Alia on ahead, and went back to the
Planning Office, opening the door quietly. "Jordan "

He looked up. "Yes, brother "

I inclined my**head. He left Krishnamurti and stepped out into the
corridor. "Yeah "

I tried to say it just right. "Been meaning to ask you. What made you
decide to stop wearing that mask "

He looked startled, ran a finger across his big smashed nose.

"None of my business, of course, but . . . well, I may be stupid, but
I'm just beginning to put two and two together about my woman."

He did what I know he thought was smiling, and nodded. "You got it, man.
After the Muskies took you from my cave, I got into it with yo' old lady
a few times. Couldn't figure why she stop' you from killing me when you
had the chance. We talked some. Whoo-ee, she said a lot of words I
didn't wanna hear. Made me some mad. I got to thinkin', after High
Mistral hit me thataway, thinkin' on things she said. I figured the
thing she say that make me maddest mus' be the truest." His voice
deepened. "Was she say, `You don't need to hide behind that
handkerchief.' Was, `You should be as proud of that face as you always
was of the black skin that was given you by the same Lord Pan.' She got
a way of humblin' you an' makin' you proud all at the same time."

"I know what you mean."

"You know, all that time we was talkin' in that cave, I never thought I
knew where she was at one time. But I believe it hadn't been for her,
that High Mistral never coulda got to me. You know "

I put my meat hand on his shoulder. "I know. The same goes for me. I'm
just beginning to realize what I married."

"Man, you gotlucky . Be worthy." He squeezed my arm.

"It's a challenge, all right. Later."

"Peace."

* * *

I hurried outside. A coffee urn squatted on a folding table beside the
heavily loaded truck, and Mrs. Wilson was passing out steaming cups. I
traded Alia a kiss for one and turned to face Dad, Helen, Wendell and
Mike. As usual, Helen looked away. "So you mugs are our ambassadors, huh "

"So you're our mayor, huh " Mike asked.

"I stand foursquare for chickenshit in every pot patch. Seriously, Mike,
how's your undermind  You sure you and Wendell can link up with Dad "

"Yep. High Mistral introduced me to a colleague whose name doesn't
translate, and we have excellent rapport. With the aid of the Infernal
Gadget, it's a sure thing."

"What's the new Musky like "

"Reminds me of music a lot. I call him `Gershwind.' "

I winced. "High-ra Gershwind, no doubt."

Wendell spoke up diffidently. "No, actually `George.' The Rhapsody in Blew."

"Get thee behind me," I groaned. "Alia, have you told Helen yet "

"No. I thought perhaps you should."

I studied her a moment in admiration. "Just can't help it, can you  Pure
instinct."

"I don't know what you mean," she lied.

"Nor I," Helen said. "Tell me what "

"Well," I said, turning to face her and Dad, "first I have to tell you
what Alia and I did last night."

Mike cut in. "Three to one you haven't discovered anything I hadn't
tried by your age." Helen blushed.

"You're on," I said, "for an ounce of hash. We spent the night in the
undermind, linked with High Mistral, and by the end of the trip it was a
five-way hookup."

"I don't follow," Dad said. "Who were the others "

"Alia found us the first one. A little squirt named Wendell Jacob
Stone." Gasps and other exclamations. "It wasn't exactly what you'd call
a dialogue he seems to be just now growing a central nervous system. But
we felt him. Felt his struggle to live and grow."

"My God," Dad said. Wendell's jaw hung down.

"I'm impressed," Mike said soberly. "What was it like "

"Like meeting High Mistral for the first time, cubed, and then cubed
again. Like looking on the face of God."

"You said `five-way,' " Helen spoke up, meeting my eyes for the first time.

"It was Isham's idea," Alia said quietly. "Since I'd brought us into
that plane, he suggested we step up our reception. So we did."

"And . . .  "

"Helen," I told her, "I'm very glad you decided to leave the sunpower
specs with George and go to New York. Dad'll be a lot of comfort to you
when the morning sickness starts."

"No!" She started, and then her face went so utterly smooth that fifty
years' worth of wrinkles disappeared. Dad dropped his coffee on his
feet, looking like a man who'd been kicked in the head by an ox. Mike
had a grin a half-meter wide, and Wendell had the other half.

"Yup. There's a little blastula in your belly."

Mike caught the feminine suffix. "A girl, eh "

"I didn't grok any Y chromosomes. Always wanted a sister."

"Isham . . . oh, Isham! I . . ." Helen was saying. She seemed to have
something else to say, but she couldn't get it out. Dad was speechless.
"Oh, Isham!" Alia caught my eye, gestured with hers.

"Want to step inside a minute, Helen " I nodded toward the door of the
Ad building.

She thought about it. "No." She gulped her coffee as though it were raw
whiskey, and placed the cup carefully on the urn-table. "No, I want to
say this in front of Jacob. He's been asking me for two weeks now why I
still seem to hold a grudge against you. He says it doesn't make sense
to forgive him for what he did to the world if I can't forgive you for
what you tried to do to him." She took a deep breath. "He's right,
Isham. I've cordially despised you for over fifteen years, now attempted
murder had nothing to do with it."

"I don't understand."

"Your wife does don't you, dear " Alia said nothing. "It's your face,
Isham. Your face." She got stuck then.

I must have looked stupid.

"You look like her,"Helen cried, and Dad jumped again.

"Oh, holy shit," I breathed, and Alia smiled.

"You looked like Barbara," Helen repeated, "You reminded me of what she
had had, what I thought I could never have. Even when the War ended I
despised you, because I thought I could never have Jacob's child. I
thought it was too late." She burst into noisy tears, and Dad snapped
out of his trance and took her in his arms. His eyes met mine over her
shoulder, and I ran to embrace them both. "It's all right, Mother," I
said gently, "It's all right. It's over now."

She pulled away from Dad and threw her arms around me, and as I hugged
her back I gave Alia a thumb-and-forefinger circle.

* * *

Finally all the hugs were over with and the congratulations had all been
said and the sun was climbing high in the sky. It was time, as Lightin'
Sam says, to bottle it up and go. Mrs. Wilson took her coffee-urn
inside. Workers began passing by on their way to Southtown, singly and
in groups. Most called out cheery farewells to Dad and Helen and Mike,
and Dad thanked them all by name. One or two even said good-bye to
Wendell, which pleased me. Won't be such an insuperable PR problem after
all. Historycan be rewritten. Wendell acknowledged the few farewells
with dignity, not in the least disturbed by their rarity.

I took him by the shoulder with my meat hand, Dad with the metal one.
"Okay, you two. Off you go. Listen to your teacher Docta Mike, and do
your homework. I don't want to have to boss this burg forever, you know."

"This is the first vacation I've had in eighteen years," Dad said
placidly, "and my first honeymoon in twenty-five. I'll be back when I'm
damned good and ready." Helen and Mike guffawed.

"That's telling him," Wendell agreed. "I haven't shared a laboratory
with your father in a long time, Isham. I haven't shared a lab
withanyone in a long time. I might get to like it."

"You'd better come back with this crew when they're done," Alia
threatened, "or I'll come after you. I want you at my birthing, dammit."

"That I'll return for," Wendell promised. "Isham, you listen toyour
teacher too."

"I do," I said, grinning at Alia.

"Let'sroll ," Mike said, and got into the truck. The other three
walked around the front and boarded too, and the big engine roared into
life. "Mighty crowded cab," I observed, and Dad, Helen, and Wendell said
"No it isn't" in chorus and then laughed together.

"Give my regards to Broadway," I said, and they were gone. The commuters
walking along West Avenue cheered as the truck went by. Alia and I
watched until it was out of sight, and then linked arms and headed for
the Linkin' Tunnel and her smithy.

"You handled that business with Helen pretty smoothly," I told her as we
entered the tunnel.

"I just like to see people be happy," she said, a bit defensively.

"I'm not mocking, Madonna, I'm applauding. You can't help being an
empath, and you wouldn't if you could. Hell, right now I wouldn't be
surprised if you're trying to figure out a way to fix Wendell up with a
girlfriend."

"What do you think of Mrs. Wilson " she asked seriously.

