/. WHICH TELLETH HOW KING
CHARLEMAGNE SUMMONED THE
PEERS OF FRANCE

Now it chanced that in those grim and sorrowful
days which came to the court and land of France
after the death of Roland and the other noble
dukes and brave lords who fell with him in that
last great battle against the Saracens, King Char-
lemagne was driven to think much of the future
of his realm. And sober and stern were his
thoughts because of the evil which might befall
his people now that these great heroes were gone
from amongst them.

Thus he was moved to summon unto his court
all the paramount lords and peers yet living, that
he might take council with them concerning
France in the days to come. But of the mighty
Twelve who had once upheld his throne there was
left only the Duke Naymes of Bauyer.

To his counsel would the King ever listen, for
Duke Haymes had been comrade-in-arms, shield-

9




mate and cup-brother to those who had gone—
Roland and Oliver and Ogier the Dane and all the
rest of the great ones.

When all the peers and lords were assembled
before him, King Charlemagne spoke out that
thought which was his constant fear, namely:

"Full sorry and bereft is this kingdom, for its
fairest and greatest knights lie ravens' meat in
the mountain passes. No longer doth Roland sit
among you, or Oliver lift his voice in wise counsel.
And I am an old man, worn thin by hard years.

"What will chance with France and with those
within her borders when I lay down sword and
crown at Death's bidding? This is the question I
would now have you answer for me.

"Name you now my successor, for time hangs
like a heavy cloak about my shoulders and this
crown, which was but a featherweight in the days
of my youth, is now a circle of lead wearing griev-
ously upon my white head.

"Aye, I have two sons. But neither one can I
with a clear conscience bring before you and say,
"This is he who shall sit on the throne in my room.'

"For the younger, Louis, is still but a stripling
in years, untried and unproven, and so no king
for a troubled age. As for the elder. Chariot—a
bringer of sorrow has he already been in times
past. Did he not give freedom to his red temper
and strike down the son of Ogier, thus near calling
ruin upon us all? Therefore, if you think it well
to set aside Chariot, although I do love him well,
I shall not say you nay. For a kingdom is like unto
a new-broke stallion, a firm and knowing hand
must hold the guiding rein.

10

"Now among yourselves do you ponder this
matter and your words shall be my will."

Having so spoken the King withdrew into an
inner chamber and the peers glanced uneasily at
one another, no man wishing to speak before his
neighbor lest his words be thought foolish and of
small merit.

But Duke Naymes, having reason to fear no
man there, arose then and spoke, all listening to
him.

"Since our Lord King hath laid this task upon
us let us acquit ourselves as becomes peers of
France. The King hath spoken truly concerning
Prince Louis. He is but a youth who hath never
been put to the test, nor has he yet known the
weight of mail, or held a full course against the
enemy in the open field. Therefore he is no proper
leader for knights in war, nor does he yet have
the full wisdom of a man.

"But Prince Chariot is of greater years and hath
held his place in battle. True, he hath done much
that was foolish and devil, but how does a man
leam wisdom, save through the sharpness of his
own wrongdoing? And perhaps the Prince hath
long since learned the errors of his hot-tempered
youth and now governs himself as befits a knight
of honor. Also, he is of the true blood of kings and
if we now set him aside there will be no peace in
the land when King Charlemagne is dead. For
there will be those who will follow Chariot to the
death and we shall have brother against brother
and father against son in unnatural war. It will
end in the ruin of us all.

"Therefore I now say and urge upon you all, my

11

lords, choose Chariot to come after the king so
that our future may be one of peace."

The peers and lords were well pleased at this
advice, for the truth of the Duke's words was plain,
even to the slowest of wit among them. So they
sent one of their number to wait upon the King
with the knowledge that they had made their
choice. And he straightway returned to the council
chamber.

Duke Haymes then spake aloud the will of the
peers—namely, that Prince Chariot be king after
his father. And King Charlemagne was well
pleased and more merry than he had been for
many a long day. For greatly did he love his son
and he was proud that the peers would choose
Chariot who, for his sins in the past, was much
hated in the land.

Now among the lords in council was one, Earl
Amaury, who was of the same black traitor blood
as that twice-damned villain Gannelon (he who
betrayed Roland and his fellow knights to their
deaths). And this Amaury was as foul a rogue as
Gannelon himself. But he was also fair efface and
pleasant of voice, very courteous to those who
could serve him in some wise. So was the depth
of his evil soul hidden to most men and Charle-
magne had made him governor to Prince Chariot.

Only one of the great lords had ever suspected
that it was Amaury who had taught the young
Prince much of the wickedness which he practiced.
And that lord was Duke Sevin who ruled wisely
and well the rich duchies of Bordeaux and Aqui-
taine. Although Sevin was dead these many years,
Amaury's hate for him was so great that even
death could not still it and, since he could not

12

attack Sevin, he planned revenge against the
Duke's two young sons, Huon and Gerard. These
youths he swore secretly to bring to ruin and
shameful death.

With this deep in his snake-brain, he arose now
and, smiling as he ever did, addressed the King,
saying:

"Lord King, young men must learn many things
in this hard world and he who would rule a king-
dom hath doubly much to master. Therefore, while
you are yet amongst us to advise and oversee him,
let Prince Chariot be given a dukedom to hold,
that he may learn to govern the larger in the
smaller."

The King nodded at the wit in this, as did the
other peers. But Duke Naymes drummed with his
nails upon the broad arm of his chair, for he had
been friend to Duke Sevin and had heard much
from him concerning the foulness of Amaury. So
that now he suspected a wrong in the making.

"There is," Amaury, encouraged by the King's
smiles, continued, "a fair duchy, rich and mighty,
meet for any prince, which is forfeit to Your Maj-
esty because of the rash rebellion of its natural
lords. Let this be given now to Prince Chariot for
his testing."

King Charlemagne showed open surprise, for
he could not remember any rebel duchy. And he
asked:

"Name you this Duke who is rebel against us."

Amaury replied readily and openly enough:

"My Lord King, I speak of Bordeaux which is
forfeit to Your Grace, since Huon and his brother
Gerard who now rule there have not come to your
court to do homage for their lands—as is your will

13

and the law of France. Duke Sevin, their father,
is long dead, and yet never have their faces been
seen among your lords."

Then did Duke Naymes rise up in such haste
as to nigh overturn his chair of state. Black with
anger was his face and hot his voice as he made
answer:

"The truth of this matter is otherwise, Lord
King. When Sevin, who was much loved amongst
us and for good cause, departed into Paradise, his
sons were but green youths, untried in judgment
or battle. And in their names the Duchess Aclis
hath ruled these many years. Greatly did she love
Sevin and greatly does she love these sons of his
who are much like him as he was in the days of
his first youth. Therefore she cannot bear that
they go from her or that they be placed in any
risk. So have they not yet come to court by reason
of their tender years and their mother's great love
for them—and not because of any willful rebellion
against Your Grace. In proof of my words—send
now to Bordeaux and summon these two!"

As Naymes spoke, King Charlemagne remem-
bered well Duke Sevin and bethought himself that
the sons of such a worthy father could not be
judged rebels without good cause. So he called to
him two trusty knights and laid these commands
upon them:

"Go you now to the city of Bordeaux and there
seek out the sons of Duke Sevin and his lady, the
Duchess Aclis. And in my name bid them come
to court that they may do homage and be con-
firmed in their father's lands according to the laws
of France. Mark you well how they make you wel-
come and whether they pay you the full honors

14

becoming those who carry the king's words. A
then return hither at all speed and report how;

were received."

And the knights rode with their men for E
deaux but Earl Amaury's hate grew even hoi
against Huon and his brother and he went av
to plot in secret for their undoing.

15

II. HOW HUON RECEIVED THE KING'S
COMMAND AND AMAURY PLOTTED
HIS RUIN

When those knights who played herald at the or-
der of the King reached the fair and pleasant city
of Bordeaux they rode straight to the Keep of that
city where lived and held court the Duchess Aclis
and her sons. And these same youthful lords had
but that hour returned from the chase so that they
stood yet in the courtyard, each bearing upon his
wrist his gerfalcon, hooded and jessed.

But when the King's men made known their
presence Huon did come forward to greet them in
great eagerness and with his own hand did he hold
the stirrup of the eldest knight for his dismount-
ing, showing him the courtesy which he would
have paid to the King himself. Right pleasantly
too did the Duchess Aclis and Lord Gerard wel-
come them, receiving them with all honors, so that

the knights were much pleased, saying privately
to one another:

"Were our Lord King here these lords of Bor-
deaux could show him no better greeting than
they have given to us."

When they had refreshed themselves from their
journey and could want no comfort, then did Huon
ask of them their business and why Charlemagne
had so sent them to Bordeaux. And the eldest
made reply for them all:

"It is the will of our lord and dread master, King
Charlemagne of France, that the sons of Duke
Sevin come unto him and join his court that they
may be made known unto their brother peers and
confirmed in their lands as is the law."

The Duchess Aclis hastened to make answer,
saying:

"If our Lord King hath now any fault to find
with my dear sons because they have not sought
his court before, let the full weight of his just an-
ger fall upon me. When my gracious lord. Duke
Sevin, departed from me into the realm beyond
our stars, he left me desolate and fearful, with but
infants to comfort me. In their childish faces I saw
ever my lord and I could not bear that they should
go out of my keeping, even for the space of an
hour. But now that they are men grown—though
still of tender years—I can no longer rule their
lives by a woman's jealous fears. Let them but
wait until after the Easter season so that once
more we may celebrate together the Rising of Our
Lord Jesu, and I shall surrender them to the King
so that they may become his men in all things,
even as was their noble father."

17

Huon arose then, his comely face shining with

pride and pleasure, and said to'the King's mes-
sengers:

"Go then to our Lord King and say unto him
that we are much honored by his commands and
shall speedily set forth to appear at his court,
obeying only this last wish of our lady mother,
that we celebrate the Rising of Christ by her side.
Take you also, in remembrance of this meeting,
these coursers of the Orkney breed—may they
bear you faithfully and well into the heart of bat-
tle or over the roads of peace—and with them take
also the knights' cloaks which hang upon their
saddles and the purses looped therewith. For to

the messengers of a King no man can do too much
honor."

Then were the King's knights indeed amazed,
for such costly gifts were the largess of a great
lord. And with great joy they did put on the fine
silken cloaks of deep crimson and mount the war
stallions. Many thanks did they say before they
rode again through the gates of Bordeaux.

And when they returned to the King's court !
they spoke together and severally concerning ,;

Huon and his brother and the open-handed Duch- |
ess. Too much praise they could not give to the
lords and lady of Bordeaux.

"Lord Huon," said the eldest knight, "is even
yet but a slender stripling but he is princelike in
his courtesy and fine speaking. He is the most
comely of face and person, the finest lording, that
I have seen within the borders of France since our
beloved Roland was a youth. And his brother Ger-
ard is like unto him, though not as mighty a war-
rior as yet, being slighter of person and younger
ia

of years. Greatly do the twain of them honor Your
Grace and much eagerness to come to you do they
show, staying only with their mother until after
the Eastertide that they may obey her last re-
quest."

His messengers then showed the King the
princely gifts which had been made them and he
was astonished and greatly pleased to see such
honor shown to his knights. So he did vow before
the assembled lords and peers:

"In the days which are now long past Duke
Sevin of Bordeaux was cup-brother and sword-
mate to us and he was loved even as a brother of
our own blood. Worthy was he of all good will and
high honor and now it seems that he hath left
behind him on this earth two sons bred of his spirit
as well as of his flesh. For as this young Lord
Huon hath treated my messengers, so did his
father render homage in the old days to those to
whom honor was due.

"Such young lords will be ornaments to our as-
semblage. And I do swear that when they come
hither Huon shall be proclaimed a peer of France,
even as he will be confirmed in his holding of
Bordeaux and Aquitaine. And Gerard shall be
made a member of our own household to his ad-
vancement."

All the lords and peers agreed with the King's
words—save Amaury, who, seeing such a sorry
end to his hopes of ruin for Sevin's sons, knew that
he must plot anew. And in his dark mind an evil
plan began to grow.

He hurried from the council hall of the King
into the apartments- of Prince Chariot where he
found the King's son dallying at ease with some




young knights and squires of his following. And
there Amaury did fling himself on his knees before
the Prince, to clutch at Chariot's cloak and cry
aloud for justice.

The Prince, much amazed at Amaury's outcry,
did send the others from him and demand that the
Earl tell him the cause of such distracted actions.
Then did Amaury display the blackness of his
heart in the words of his crooked mouth.

"Know you, Prince Chariot, your father, de-
ceived by false enemies, is bringing hither to court
that traitor Huon of Bordeaux and his brother
Gerard. And our King promises to bestow upon
Huon the duchies of Bordeaux and Aquitaine
which should be rightfully yours. While Gerard
the King promises to take into his household
where he may secretly work all manner of ill. Once
here at court they will work against your Grace,
for this Huon and his brother come of bad stock
and me they hate so that they will even seek to
injure you—since you have played my friend—
bringing ruin upon the man through his master.
So do I warn you now, Prince Chariot, if these
twain enter into this court black evil will come
with them and none—even the highest—shall be
safe from their wickedness."

Now was Chariot alarmed at the words of
Amaury for in his heart he knew well that he was
not well beloved in France and that many of the
lords hated him for his ill deeds of the past. So,
should Huon and Gerard come to work against
him secretly, they would find many to listen to
them. Thus, with all his fears and hate aroused,
Chariot prayed Amaury to tell him what to do to

20

defend himself against these brothers from Bor-
deaux.

And Amaury advised Chariot to arm and horse
divers of his men and meet secretly with him,
Amaury, without the city that they might arrange
to deal with Huon and Gerard before they reached
the King's court. Eagerly enough Chariot agreed.

21

HI. HOW AMAURY AND CHARLOT DID
LIE IN AMBUSH AND WHAT CHANCED
THEREFROM

"The feast of Easter being over Huon and Gerard
did prepare to keep their promise to the King.
Choosing from among their men divers knights
and squires, they did clothe them anew from helm
to spur with cunningly made armor that they
might make a goodly sight at court. But Huon and
Gerard donned no mail, nor did the younger
brother even buckle sword belt about him. For
they were minded to journey in peace and safety
under the protection of the King.

Huon, however, did put on him that sword belt
wrought of fine silver and gold which Duke Sevin
had worn in war and peace, and from it did hang
that good blade, forged far across the seas in the
unknown Easter lands by Demons of the Night
(or so said the simple folk of the country) which
Sevin had swung in battle ofttimes before—to

22

King Charlemagne's great gain. But of body ar-
mor Huon had none, only went at ease in tunic
and cloak.

Duchess Aclis wept full sore to see her sons
depart thus from Bordeaux. For never since their
hour of birth had the twain not been where her
eye might sight upon them and now her heart
misgave her strangely, for she had secretly dwelt
upon all those evils which might chance while
Huon and Gerard were apart from her. But of this
she said naught lest she shadow the brightness
of their adventure and she hid her many tears
behind her veil.

Gerard did not ride so boldly forth from the
gate, nor did he spur his horse into the freshness
of the morning beyond the city. Rather did he am-
ble soberly at the pace of one who goes unwillingly
upon a disliked errand so that Huon must needs
rein back to company him. And when his brother
laughingly chid him for his snail-like creeping,
Gerard surprised Huon beyond measure with a
breathless answer:

"Brother, I fear me that no good will come to
either of us from this venture. Let us back to Bor-
deaux and that speedily!"

Loud indeed then did Huon laugh, and cry that
his brother was a babe and already crying for his
mother's arms. But Gerard showed no anger at
this taunt. Rather he turned once more and gazed
with great longing at the towers and walls of Bor-
deaux.

"Evil lies before us," he continued. "Aye, great
evil comes of this journey. Last night I did dream
that I rode on this same highway and out of the
bushes there did spring upon us a raging leopard

23

his jaws agape with hunger. Me he did bear to
earth and rend with dripping fangs so that my
soul was driven from my body and I was dead. But
you, my brother, escaped his fury. So plain was
my dream that I do deem it a warning sent from
Heaven that we should not travel on this
way—" r

But Huon shook his head. "More likely it be an
omen sent by the Devil to tempt us from our duty
to the King, so that we will break our pledged
word. See—this day is fair and the countryside
most good to look upon. Our road is smooth before
us and behind ride twenty good knights and
squires to serve us well. Put aside your foolish
fears, Gerard, they are but shadows and no fit
musing for a grown knight."

So Gerard spoke no more. But in his heart he
knew anger against his brother, that Huon would
so easily dismiss his warning. And he thought
that long had it been thus, that Huon, bold and
fearless and taking little heed for the future, had
set aside the cautions of his younger brother. Yet
Huon was loved and praised by all and he, Gerard,
was deemed a youngling, not to be given serious
heed.

Before nightfall they met with the worthy Ab-
bot of Cluny who was also on his way to court.
And both the brothers were most glad to see him,
for he was their well-beloved uncle. So did they
join their party to his and that night all lay to-
gether in friendship at an abbey he chose to visit.

Again in the morning, after breaking their fast,
they rode on together and all went very well with
them until they reached the top of a hill and could
see where the road wound down into the leafy lip

24

of a wood. Huon pulled back his mount and those
with him, wondering at his act, did likewise.

Then he pointed out to the company certain
flashes of light among the trees below—as if men
clad in mail moved there. And so the party hesi-
tated, not knowing what lay before them, hidden
in that wood.

Since they were not men of war, the Abbot and
his monks and laymen withdrew to the side of the
road, and the churchman spoke frankly to Huon,
saying:

"Fair sir, I and all my followers are men of peace
and good will. If evil men lie in ambush before us,
surely they must mean ill to you who ride with
armor on your backs and swords at your sides.
Therefore, since of war I can have no part, we
needs must separate here and go our several ways.
For if I shed blood, even in the defending of my
own, I have committed black sin. But you are a
man of strife and bred to conflict."

And, as the Abbot was speaking so, out of the
trees below a Knight, masked by the lowered visor
of his helmet, spurred his horse to that he now
barred the path of all who would come down the
hill. There he sat silently waiting.

After looking upon this barrier of knight and
horse most closely, Huon said to his brother:

"There is no reason for either of us to fear aught
of any man living, for we have no quarrels hang-
ing above our heads. You wear no armor, nor do
you bear a sword, so all can see that you ride in
peace with the world. Get you down now, into the
valley and ask of that knight what he would have
of us."

And Gerard obeyed his brother. Coming down
25




into the valley of the wood he reined in his mount
before the silent knight and addressed him boldly.

"Good sir, what do you wish of us who would
quarrel with no man this day? Know you, I am
Gerard of Bordeaux and yonder is my brother
Huon, Duke of that same city. We are bound, by
the King's own command, to the court of Char-
lemagne. Therefore stay us not, lest the justice of
the King demand an accounting from you—"

Now the masked knight was Prince Chariot,
the King's son. But he was not minded to speak
to Gerard his rightful name. Instead he answered
the boy despitefully and with much anger, saying:

"Rash youth, know you that I am son to Duke
Thierry, he who hath many times been injured by
those of your house. And now I am here to end all
his wrongs upon your bodies—doing to death you
and that proud cockerel who sits yonder daring
to name himself Duke of Bordeaux. The lands of
Bordeaux are by all rights mine!"

Gerard being warned by the anger of the
knight's speech would have then fled. But his
mount stumbled and Chariot bore down upon the
helpless youth, his lance in crouch.

Deep into Gerard's tender flesh struck the steel
so that he was borne from his horse and fell heav-
ily_upon the packed earth of the road, and from
his side there poured a thick flood of rich blood so
that he swooned. Thus he did not hear Chariot's
loud shout of:

""So do I serve mine enemies. As you lie, so shall
fall that other dog of Bordeaux!"

But Huon heard that shout and his heart was
white-hot with his rage for he believed his young

26

brother dead—foully slain without defense by this
masked murderer. And his temper broke all bonds
so that to him the whole world was as red as the
blood still flowing from Gerard's slight body.

27




IV. HOW HUON DID SLAY THE KING'S
SON AND RODE TO COURT FOR
JUSTICE

When Huon saw his loved brother Gerard lying
as one dead in a spreading pool of his own blood,
his rage did so rise within him that he took no
heed of those about him or of aught else in the
whole world save that villain who had struck
down the unarmed boy. Drawing that good sword
which had so long served his father, Duke Sevin,
Huon rode down the hill to meet ths unknown

knight.

And Chariot, seeing his enemy coming so wildly
and recklessly upon him, unarmed save for a
sword, with no mail upon his body or helm upon
his head, looked forward to an easy battle. He set
ready his lance and urged his mount forward to

the kill.

But Huon was no untried swordster and, seeing
how this stranger meant to spit him cleanly upon

28

lance point, he gathered his cloak about his arm
and flung it at the lance—at the same time throw-
ing his body to one side. Thus did Chariot's lance
become entangled in the folds of cloth and Huon
passed unharmed by the charge although the
sharp point of steel pierced his tunic and bruised
the flesh beneath.

As Chariot strove to throw away his lance and
free his sword from its scabbard, Huon struck.
And so sharp and heavy was the blow that the
Prince fell from his charger and was dead even
before his body rolled in the roadway.

Huon troubled not to lift the visor of his dead
enemy or look closely upon him whom he had
killed. Rather did he busy himself with searching
out the deep wound in Gerard's side and binding
the yet-welling slash with linen torn from his own
back. Having so rudely stanched his brother's hurt
he lifted him up, still a-swoon, into the saddle of
his horse and walked beside him out of the valley,
leaving the dead Prince in the road alone.

Speedily was Huon joined by the knights and
men of his following. And they urged that all must
travel without pause lest the companions of the
dead knight come out of the wood to cut them
down. And all armed themselves for such an at-
tack.

But when they reached again the party of the
Abbot of Cluny, he bade them take heart for he
had seen, from the hilltop, men come out of the
wood to bear away the stranger. And none of these
had set out on Huon's trail.

Huon's anger was still hot and his heart was
dark with misgiving as he looked upon the white

29

face and drooping body of his brother. And out of
his deep foreboding he spoke to his men:

"Cursed be King Charlemagne if this deed was
of his planning! If it was his secret purpose to so
put an end to the line of Sevin—then has he lost.
For while I live and stand upright on my two feet
and have an arm strong enough to swing my
father's sword, I shall avenge this foul deed. Even
in the very beard of the King shall I speak my
mind concerning this. For such treachery there is
no pardon—that we should be so enticed to our

deaths!"

And naught that the Abbot could say would
abate the great rage of Huon which was ever
freshly kindled by the sight of Gerard who now
and again moaned and cried aloud upon the name
of Our Lord Jesu for reason of the keen pain of his

hurt.

Meanwhile the Earl Amaury did issue forth
from his ambush in the wood to speak sharply to
those about the body of Chariot, ordering them to
take up the dead Prince and tie him across his
own saddle. Then, leading the burdened charger
with his own hand he, too, rode to the King's court,
followed by his men and those of Chariot's house-
hold. On the way he thought much of the ill he
could now do to Huon because of this slaying and
how he might best arouse the King's full wrath
against the youth from Bordeaux.

First to reach the court of Charlemagne was
Huon and his party. And straight into the King's
presence they strode, bearing with them on a lit-
ter, fashioned of cloaks and lances, the swooning

Gerard.

All those assembled there—peers, nobles and

30

King—were much astounded at such a coming but
Huon went boldly to the foot of the throne and
cried aloud so that all fell silent to hear him:

"Is this the justice of King Charlemagne?"

The pride of his bearing was such that anger
arose in the King's throat for no man had so
fronted him since the days of his youth. And he
would have made swift return to such insolence
but he was minded to know the wherefore of this
strange entrance. So he made reply in more mod-
erate voice than those of his following expected
to hear, saying:

"How now, stripling. Why comest thou hither
in such clamor demanding to know of our justice?
Who are you and who is this youth you bear on
a litter?"

"Know you, Lord King," returned Huon, still
proud of bearing, "I am that Huon of Bordeaux,
son of Duke Sevin, whom you by royal decree did
summon to you. And this be my brother Gerard
who lies here sore stricken because, though wear-
ing no sword or armor, he was set upon most foully
by a full armored knight.

^  "Was it by your pleasure that we were so way-
laid and attacked? If it was—look you now upon
your handiwork and rejoice, noble King!"

Quickly Huon stooped and tore away the cloak
which was wrapped about Gerard so that all might
see the stained linen about his wound and how
the rising blood made it like unto a corselet of
ruby.

Then did Huon draw his sword and set it before
him. And the torches and cresslights picked out
the shining steel save where the blood of Chariot,
now dried, dimmed the gleam.

31




"Look you here also, Lord King. These stains
are the blood of the murderer who now lies dead
himself—and by my hand. For so do we of Bor-
deaux pay just debts!"

King Charlemagne looked upon Gerard even as
Huon had bade him and his heart was moved to
see so fair a youth lying in such extremity. No
longer was his anger turned against Huon, but
rather against those who had wrought so ill a
deed. And when he made answer it was a firm
promise.

"Hotly do you speak, Lord Huon. But if I stood
so, doubtless my words would also be aheat with
just anger. Know you that this deed is as foul in
my eyes as it is in yours and he who did it shall
be searched out—if he who planned it was not the
same who struck down your brother and was so
fitly punished! Listen, all ye assembled here, it
was by my will that these youths were summoned
hither and what touches them, touches also me.
Therefore they shall be as my sons and do you so
receive them.

"Bring hither those skilled in leechcraft and let
them look to the wounds of the Lord Gerard that
he may be comforted."

So was it done as the King commanded and the
leeches did say that Gerard would be healed of his
hurt.'

But for Chariot there was no healing in this
world and Amaury thought only of how to turn
the Prince's death to his own account.

V. OF THE EVIL AMAURY WROUGHT
WITH HIS LYING TONGUE

Now at sunset of that same day there came riding
into the King's city the Earl Amaury leading
Chariot's charger with his master's body bound
upon its back. And as he rode within the gates
Amaury raised a great wailing cry of grief, as did
all those who rode with him. So hearing this sad
lament the townspeople gathered and they too
wept at such a woeful sight. Straight into the pres-
ence of Charlemagne did Amaury ride, finding the
King at wine with Huon and the other peers.

Before the King, Amaury did unloose the body
of the Prince so that it slipped to the floor with
a crash of armor and lay at the father's feet. Then
the traitor Earl cried aloud so that all there did
hark unto him, saying:

"Look you upon the body of Prince Chariot who
has been most foully done to death. Slain, my King
and lords, by this villain who dares to sit now in

33

32







the high seat of honor—namely, Huon of Bor-
deaux!"

Huon, looking closely at the body, knew it for
that of the knight who had wounded Gerard and
later fallen by his own sword. And he marveled
at Amaury's words for he had not knowingly
struck down Chariot. So that now he made answer
quietly enough:

"Lord King, this corpse lying here is that of the
stranger knight who did wound my brother and
whom I did kill in fit punishment for so black a
deed—my brother being unarmed—"

But while he yet spoke Amaury dropped to his
knees and freed the head of the dead man from
its helmet so that all there assembled might see
the still face. And from the throat of the old King
there broke a pitiful cry. Deeply had he loved
Chariot and here now lay his son, slain in the full
pride of his youth.

"My son!" That cry rang through the halls and
pierced the hearts of all who heard it, for the depth
of the King's sorrow was bared in his words.

"Aye, your son, Lord King. And there stands
the false Huon whom you cherish and yet who
hath killed Chariot. We were hunting in the forest
as the Prince was wont to do and, having loosed
his falcon against fair prey, he was vexed when
the bird returned not—so he needs must pursue
it. Whilst we rode so, unheeding of our path, we
came upon a road where this suckling rogue was
passing, the Prince's own falcon upon his wrist.
When Prince Chariot demanded that his own be
returned to him this same Huon and his brother
set upon the Prince, cutting him down without

When he heard such lies the rage arose within
Huon so that at first it choked speech from him.
But he cast his glove so that it struck the Earl full

across his false lips.

"Thou liest!" cried the young lord of Bordeaux

when he could again command his voice.

But King Charlemagne had made a secret sign
to his guards to take the Duke, and that they now
did, bearing him down with their strength and
binding fast his arms in spite of his struggles.

"Strike off the head of this murderer!" roared

the King.

But, as his guards would have obeyed. Duke

Naymes held him off, saying:

"By all the laws of chivalry and knighthood, we
cannot so use this youth. He hath named Amaury
'Liar' and hath challenged him to prove the truth
of his tale with his body—Our Lord God standing
as the Judge of both. Such is his right and no
earthly King may take it from him!"

Charlemagne was dour with wrath but he saw
that all the peers and lords of the court were of
Naymes' mind and, Ahat if he wrought his will
upon Huon, trouble would come of it. So he was
forced to agree. But he did so grudgingly and with

black hatred in his heart.

"Let them fight according to the uses of chiv-
alry," he said slowly. "And may God bring justice
to this murderer. But likewise may it be recorded
now that if either be slain before he confesses fault
in the matter, then the other is straightway ban-
ished from this realm never to return!"

A strong outcry arose from all because of this
injustice—for all knew that either might be killed
in the heat of battle in such a way that he would

have no time for confession. Naymes spoke strongly
to the King, but to no avail, and Charlemagne's
will in this was so set that no man might sway
him.

Huon then went forth with Naymes who was
pledged to keep him safe against the morrow when
he would meet Amaury in the field. And the Earl
withdrew likewise leaving court and King to
mourn the fallen Prince.

36

VI. HOW HUON DEALT WITH AMAURY
IN COMBAT AND THE DOOM LAID
UPON HIM THEREAFTER

Early in the morning his squires came in to Huon
where he lay in the hold of Duke Naymes and
roused him from his sleep. On his body they did
put fair clean linen and over that a hauberk of
leather. Then did the Duke bring to the youth fine
mail wrought by craftsmen working to his own
secret pattern. This Huon discovered to be light
yet supple so that he who wore it was as one free
from armor. So armed he rode for the field yet
fasting, a war stallion of the color of fresh spilled
blood between his knees. Duke Naymes on his
right hand and the squire of his body going before
with his plumed helmet and shield.

Since Huon rode thus uncovered all those about
the field marveled at his youth and the comeliness
of his features, saying amongst themselves that
not even a king's son in his pride could equal this

37

Duke out of Bordeaux. Such whisperings reached
even to the ears of Charlemagne where he sat in
state and they fanned the hotter his wrath against
the slayer of his son.

Amaury came to the place of combat with an
easy mind, for he deemed Huon but a green boy
with no knowledge of lance or sword play, no fit
match for a warrior of many years' seasoning. But,
as he rode into the view of the court, his black
charger stumbled so that the Earl, who was riding
' easy, was near to being unhorsed. And those
watching felt this to be a dark omen.

But Amaury straightened in his saddle and put
on his helmet with a steady hand, having confi-
dence in himself and his strength.

Huon too put on his helmet, slung his shield
upon his arm and took up the lance his squire held
ready. His bright roan pawed the turf and thun-
dered a challenge of its own to the black which
Amaury curbed with a heavy hand.

Then, at the word given by the King himself,
they charged. Amaury aimed his lance at Huon's
helmet. He knew such a stroke'to be a master one
which only a skillful man might dare to attempt—
yet so sure was he of the coming battle that he
might have been a boy teasing a harmless kitten.

But Huon chose the safer attack, guessing at
what might lie in Amaury's mind. So that when
they met in their course he swung aside his head
and the Earl's lance thrust only into the thinness
of air. But Huon's lance struck straight and true
into the center of the other's shield with such force
that not only Amaury but also his attacker were
hurled from their saddles.

On foot both cast aside their useless lances and

38

drew their swords. And the Earl was so angered
by his overthrow that he came against Huon with-
out caution, having even thrown from him his
shield that he might strike a two-handed blow.

Huon still clung to his shield and with it he
caught the blow which Amaury aimed to cut him
down. Deep into the iron stove the blade in such
a way that the Earl could not speedily withdraw
it again. Then did Huon strike in his turn, so clean
a blow where neck met shoulder that the strong
mail Amaury was wearing was but as a piece of
silk. And Amaury's head, still within his plumed
helm, rolled across the dusty ground, even to the
very foot of the King's chair.

Those gathered about the lists raised a cry of
amazement, for no one of them had really believed
in his heart that Huon could overcome Amaury.
And the King's crafty heart leaped also—for if
Huon were not dead in truth, he would speedily
be dead to France—since Amaury had been killed
before confessing falseness. And so did the heralds
proclaim the King's will at his signal.

When the harsh decree of banishment was read,
all the lords about the throne raised their voices
in protest and Duke Naymes led their Outcry, say-
ing:

"Lord King, what sorrow will you do with these
hard words? This youth hath proved in battle,
with God judging the right, that he spoke true
words before you. Since he slew Prince Chariot
unwittingly, he is not to be thought a murderer.
Do you devise some punishment which will not
set him for all his lifetime far from those who hold
him dear!"

King Charlemagne's anger was waxing strong,

39

but also did he see that his lords were in open
rebellion against him in this matter. So he spoke
quietly, as if he had been moved by the speech of
Naymes.

'Truly Huon hath done much evil—taking from
me in my old age the son of my heart and from
France her king to be. But likewise is it true that
God Himself hath given this youth victory in this
strife. Therefore, lest I be too harsh I shall lay
upon Huon a quest, such as was the custom of
chivalry in bygone times. And he is not to return
to France—under the pain of shameful death—
until this quest besuccessfully finished. What say
you to that, Duke Naymes?"

Naymes, seeing that the King could be moved
no farther in Huon's behalf, assented with a bowed
head.

"This then is the quest of Huon of Bordeaux,"
proclaimed Charlemagne. "Let him go out of
France into the very stronghold of the Saracens—
the City of Babylon. There he must go into the
court of Emir Gaudys who ruleth that city. And
he shall take from the chin of Gaudys a handful
of the beard which groweth there, from the mouth
of Gaudys shall he take five teeth, and from the
body of Gaudy's chief lord shall he strike the
head—cutting it off in the full sight of all who are
men of Gaudys. To me he shall bring this hair and
teeth. In addition he must salute upon the mouth
Gaudys' daughter—in sight of her father's court!"

Now when Huon heard the conditions of the
quest his heart was desolate for he believed that
no living man, unless he had more than mortal
assistance, could survive such deeds. And so he
said to King and court:

40

"My King, you send now to his certain death
one who has wished you well all his days. May all
men hearing my story in times hereafter judge
between us."

Then he said no more but went to the bedside
of his brother Gerard into whose keeping he gave
Bordeaux and his other lands. Then, taking a sor-
rowful farewell of Gerard, he chose divers knights
and squires of his following and set forth to obey
the commands of the King.

41




VII. HOW HUON DEPARTED FROM
FRANCE AND GERARD RULED IN
BORDEAUX

With a heart full of sorrow Huon took ship with
his men and sailed to the ancient land of Italy
where they came at length to that city which lies
in the center of the world, namely, Rome. And
there did the young Duke beg audience with the
Holy Father. And His Holiness was pleased to re-
ceive him, saying:

"Long ago was thy father close to me and now
it giveth me happiness to look upon the son of his
body who is truly made after the same good fash-
ion as my ancient friend—for of thee, Huon of
Bordeaux, I have heard only good report. Tell me
now, my son, what has brought thee from France
to our gates?"

Then did Huon give tongue to all the evil which
had fastened upon him and tell of the hard task
laid upon him by Charlemagne. And he spoke full

42

sadly of his future, saying that he knew that he
now rode to his death. But when such words
crossed his lips. His Holiness stopped him with
upraised hand and chid him gently thus:

"My son, know you that all things are possible
to him who believeth upon Our Gracious Lord—
even as He Himself hath said. Go you forth armed
in faith and you shall conquer—yes, even though
against you stand in mailed might all the awful
forces of the heathen."

And at these words Huon's heart was lightened
of a heavy care and he was as a man who has been
freed from heavy chains. His Holiness then bid
Huon seek out the Duke Garyn, he who was kin
to Duke Sevin and now abode at St. Omar. And
Huon did as he was commanded, finding Garyn
a knight of no little renown, well marked by all
the realm of Christendom.

Duke Garyn welcomed the youth with open
arms, taking him to his bosom and proclaiming
him one to sit in the place of the son and heir he
had never known. Because, as he told Huon, the
boy was as the Duke Sevin had been in his first
youth and Duke Sevin was his own brother. Thus
did Huon meet with his uncle and receive much
honor and kindness from him.

When the time came that Huon and his men
must take ship for the land of the Saracens, Duke
Garyn called to him his lady wife and said:

"Look you well, my lady, to the affairs of this
duchy for I am minded to sail with my nephew so
that he ventures not alone into this great danger."

His lady wept full sore as she replied to her lord
thus:

"My good lord, much do I fear to see you go from

43

me, for evil have been my dreams of late and I
think that if you go we shall not look upon your
face again in this world. But if this be your will
then I will say naught. All shall be ordered as you
wish and I shall hold your duchy against your
return."

Having so spoken she went privately to Huon
and asked of him that he would watch over her
lord and see that no harm came to him, for deeply
did she love the Duke Garyn. And Huon swore
upon the Cross that all would be as she asked and
no harm would come to his uncle if he, Huon of
Bordeaux, could prevent.

But still she wept, hiding her tear-besmeared
face in the long sleeves of her robe as Garyn and
Huon rode forth from the hold of St. Omar.

Now while Huon journeyed thus half the world
away, his brother Gerard, having recovered of the
wound dealt him by Prince Chariot, arose from
his bed and rode home to Bordeaux. The Duchess
Aclis had a man at watch in the tower and when
he sighted the pennons on the lances of those in
Gerard's company, he called that joyful news to
all the keep, bringing the household out in haste
to welcome their returning lords.

But when Gerard came alone into the courtyard
the Duchess put her hands to her breast as if to
ward off a fatal sword thrust and cried:

"Where is thy brother? Why ride you alone?"

So Gerard needs must tell her the whole sorry
tale at once. And upon the hearing of it she uttered
a shriek, in so loud a voice that all the city heard
it and the people trembled at its meaning. So hav-
ing given voice to her woe she fell as one dead
upon the pavement.

44

Her maidens bore her speedily to her chamber,
but she never spoken again, for her heart was
broken and she was with her lord in Paradise.

For long dark days Gerard did mourn both
mother and brother—for he deemed Huon to be
dead also, since no mortal man might safely fulfill
the quest Charlemagne had laid upon him. Gerard
spoke not to those about him, nor did he break his
fast, until at last one of the old knights who had
served as his tutor in arms came to him and said:

"My lord, grievous indeed have been these mis-
fortunes laid upon you. But weeping rouses not
the dead to life again. Bordeaux needs a lord and
you must now take the high seat and rule here,
even as did your worthy father and brother before
you."

So did Gerard become Duke of Bordeaux and he
liked it full well, in time forgetting Huon and the
fact that he was only lord in Bordeaux by reason
of his brother's ill fortune. For to him Huon was
now as dead as if his body lay in the tomb of the
Dukes. In the past he had known envy of his
brother and had dreamed secret dreams of being
great when Huon was naught. Now he lived those
dreams in truth.

After some time he took to wife a daughter of
Gyblerde of Cecyll who was distantly of the blood
of that Amaury who had brought such misfortune
to the House of Duke Sevin. She was a lady of
wondrous dark beauty, both witty and sharp of
tongue, and deeply learned in certain black arts
which made her feared by the commoners
throughout the countryside. But of her family
Gerard did not think, being pleased by her person
and beguiled by the forbidden knowledge she held.

45

r

And he came to listen overmuch to her words and
those of her father, who was as crafty and double-
tongued as any rogue within the borders of

France.

And thus did evil enter into Bordeaux without

the knowledge of its rightful lord, Duke Huon.

46

VIII. HOW HUON MET WITH THE
HERMIT GERAMES AND TOOK THE
ROAD THROUGH THE FAIRY WOOD

The merchant ship wherein Huon and the Duke
Garyn and all their tram traveled set them ashore
upon a barren, cliff-bound land far from all the
cities of the Saracens, for Huon wished none to
know of his coming until he won to Babylon itself.
Taking to horse once more, he and his uncle and
their men rode inland towards the rising sun
which was the way to Babylon.

At length they came upon. the edge of a vast
wasteland across which lay open to them two
faintly marked paths. One ran through the waste
where could be seen only bare rock and sand burnt
and baked by the fierce sun, with no trees or other
green things to relieve the eye. But the other way
went on into a pleasant woodland where the trees
were a living promise of springs of water.

This road did Huon choose and had turned his

47




r

charger into it when out of a misshapen hut piled
loosely from the desert rocks there sprang one in
the rags of a hermit to bar their way.

About his loins was the torn skin of a lion and
his gray hair hung in wild ragged locks upon his
bone-thin shoulders. A long beard covered him to
his girdle, but his eyes were still afire with reason
and strength, and he bore himself as one who had
once had authority in the world beyond this

starved land.

"Pray you, fair sir," he cried unto Huon, "by

your dress and the cross you bear upon your shield
you are a Christian knight. If you be truly so, heed
now the warning of one who, though now fallen
on evil times, once held his lands of a Christian

king!"

Much astounded by such a greeting, Huon

reined in his mount and bade the man speak on,
telling how he came to live in so desolate a spot.

"Once was I the Knight Gerames who did ride
upon the right hand of good Duke Sevin of Bor-
deaux. But desiring to look upon the Sepulcher of
Our Lord Jesu, I sailed hither and my pilgrim ship
was set upon by those wolves of the sea, the pirates
of the Crescent. By them, I and all those with me
were sold into slavery and after some years I es-
caped my chains to flee here into the wilderness
where none thought to seek me. For in seven years
you have been the first to ride these ancient roads.
Know you not that these be evil lands for Chris-
tian men? What hard fate brought you hither?"

Huon replied with the tale of the quest set upon
him and how he and his uncle were on their way
now into Babylon to obey the orders of Charle-
magne.

When Gerames learned that Huon was son to
his old lord, Duke Sevin, tears came out upon his
hairy cheeks and he seized upon the youth's hand
to kiss it—vowing that he would follow Huon even
to the death from that hour forward.

But again he begged them to turn aside from
the path through the wood, saying:

"This wood is wrought of magic, being one of
those strange places where the world of Fairy
touches upon the world of men. Oberon who is
king among the People of the Hills is wont to ride
among those trees with his Fairy lords. And
should he sight a mortal man and speak to him,
and that man replyeth—why then the mortal is
under the spell of Fairy and must do all which
Oberon requireth of him for all his days. Many
powerful and sturdy knights have been so lost."

Huon looked again at the burning heat of the
desert land and saw how there was lacking there
all manner of shade and other refreshment. And
then he turned to the cool promised by the wood-
land and it drew him strangely. He asked:

"How does it chance if the mortal answers not
the words of King Oberon? Is he still caught up

in the Fairy spell?"

Gerames shook his head. "Nay. Unless a man
speaketh to King Oberon, the Lord of Fairies hold-

eth no power over him."

"Then," said Huon, "shall we keep our tongues
within our jaws and be safe even if the dread king
meets us. Beneath this hot sun we shall surely
fail and die if we go into the desert, but if we go
by the forest way we shall have shade and water

to sustain us."

So did they ride by the wood road even though

49




Gerames still prophesied that ill would come of
it. When they came into the heart of the forest
they heard the sound of a huntsman's silver horn
and into sight galloped a fair company of knights
clad all in that green which is the favorite color
of those from the Hills.

He who kept to the fore was a youth of such
shining beauty that his like has never been seen
in the world of mortal men. And splendid was his
dress, the green being overlaid with much silver
and gold, and his sword belt set with rows of
gleaming pearls, his knight's spurs roweled with
diamonds.

But in stature he was but a small child and on
his black horse he appeared as a boy of ten years
until you saw the wisdom and maturity of his face.

Seeing Huon and his company the small youth
did halt his chase and he put down on his saddle-
bow the hom he had been sounding to say:

"How now, proud mortal. Who are you who
dares to come within the boundaries of my king-
dom?" And to all their ears his voice had the
sweetness of open song.

But Huon and those with him remembered the
warning of Gerames and they made no answer,
so that King Oberon was angered by their dis-
courtesy.

"Sit clapp-fast, ye villains!" he cried. "And see
what your clownishness will cost you!"

He then put spur to his mount and rode off, his
lords behind him. While Gerames said to Huon:

"Lord, let us make haste out of this wood for I
think that this Fairy King means us some mis-
chief."

Thus did Huon and all his company use whip

and spur and tried to speed out of that ill-omened
wood. But before they reached its outer fringe
there arose such a tempest as no man of that party
had seen before.

Trees were torn by the wind to fall across their
way and there came down upon them much water
as if a river had been gathered up from its bed to
be thrown at these invading mortals. Grievous
was their plight and Huon feared that here he
would end his quest, nevermore to see the high
towers of Bordeaux.




IX. HOW HUON MADE HIS PEACE
WITH OBERON AND GAINED THEREBY

As the tempest encompassed them about and the
spears of the wind thrust in upon them, those who
were with Huon cried out against their sore fate
and bewailed this, death which was now coming
to them in a land so far from all they loved. Some
of them spoke out against Huon, saying that he
had brought them to this ill pass and that the
storm had risen from the wrath of King Oberon,
for no wind not born of magic could be so fierce.
This did Huon likewise believe and answered his
men thus:

"Aye, by my lack of thought has this evil come
to us—so that the innocent suffer beside me for
my folly. Would that I might behold once more
the dread King of Fairy and plead with him for
the lives of you who have faithfully followed me
even to this pass—"

And, even as he so spoke into the jaws of that

52

horrific wind, they heard, above the screech of the
storm, the silver notes of a hunting horn. Across
the fallen trees cantered the small lord of that
forbidden world, still followed by his Elf knights.
Close did he ride to where those of the mortal
world huddled and he addressed Huon, saying:

"Who are thou who comes riding hither without
leave of any of our world?"

And Huon, although Gerames plucked warn-
ingly at his sleeve, made quick answer.

"My Lord King, I am Huon, sometime Duke of
Bordeaux within the realm of France, now riding
exiled as a simple knight upon a quest set me by
King Charlemagne because of his hot anger
against me."

"And what crime didst thou commit to set so
generous a king, known alike to our world and
yours, against you?" queried Oberon.

"No crime save to defend myself against death,"
declared Huon boldly. And he took heart, for about
them now the tempest was stayed, no waters came
nigh and the wind had died away. So did he make
known to Oberon all that had befallen him since
that long-ago day when he had left the gates of
Bordeaux to attend the court of France.

"Ill indeed has been your fortune," observed the
Fairy King. "No mortal can do what the King has
demanded of you and come alive through the doing
of it. But what a mortal cannot do, those of my
realm can. Therefore, since you have been the first
man in full five hundred years to speak me boldly,
I shall give to you certain aids—which, if you use
them wisely, may win you what you desire.

"First—see you this horn? At my birth certain
spells were set upon it by the wise women from

53

beyond the end of the world. Gloriande did en-
chant it so that a soft note from it does blast all
illness known to man or fairy. Two notes bring
end to all hunger and thirst—by the decree of the
Lady Translyne. Blow yet louder upon it, said the
Lady Margole, and the heavy heart shall be light-
ened and all sorrow fade from the mind. While a
strong blast has the power to summon aid to your
side in time of trouble, by the will of the Wise
Lempatrix. This horn will I give unto you, asking
only that you use it with full wisdom, not idly as
might a child in play. For when you sound the
note set by Lempatrix I, myself, and all my com-
pany must obey its summons to fight beside you."

Oberon then took from about his neck the chain
which held this wondrous horn and dropped it
about Huon's shoulders so that it lay upon the
young knight's breast, and he stood dumbstruck
at such a gift. The Fairy King waited not for any
thanks but drew from the folds of his tunic a cup
of pearl and silver which, in that dark forest,
shone with a rosy light of its own.

"This too is a treasure, equal in worth to the
horn of many voices, for he who carries it need
never thirst, also will he be warned as to what
manner of company he keeps. If an honest man
raises this cup to his lips he shall find it full of
the finest wine. But should one of a dark and evil
heart seek to drink, the cup shall be as the desert
sand, empty and sere. Take -thou this, also, that
it may serve you in its own way."

The cup was put into Huon's two hands and he
stood staring into it. After a long moment he dared
to raise it to his lips and it was as Oberon had
promised, brimming rich and rare with wine.

Deep did the young knight drink and yet when he
held the cup from him it was still brim deep. So
did Huon then pass it to Garyn and so about the
company and for all of them it remained full. And
from their drinking all were greatly heartened
and knew no more thirst.

Many were the thanks which Huon did give to
Oberon for the gift of these so great treasures but
the only reply the Fairy King would make was
this:

"Follow thy quest to the end, Huon of Bordeaux,
and I shall be rewarded by thy courage, for about
you there is much which touches my heart—why,
I know not. Save that wise women have foretold
that I shall come to have a sword-brother and cup-
mate of mortal birth and mayhap thou are that
man. Go now without fear, for naught within the
bounds of this forest will harm you and your road
is plain to follow."

Before Huon could make answer Oberon and
his knights were gone, disappearing into the dark
of the forest where they were swallowed up as if
they had never been. Huon and his companions
then got to horse and rode on along the path which
Oberon had pointed out to them. And at length
they came out of the Fairy wood into a land of
meadows and streams.

When they were free of the forest Huon's men
began to talk among themselves of the gifts their
lord now carried. And some of them said that
mayhap it was only a spell laid upon them in the
Fairy wood which made such marvels seem to be.
But out in these fields Oberon's power was naught
and neither horn nor cup would obey their master.
So did they talk and talk until Huon grew angered




and wearied at their unbelief And, thinking to!
put a stop to their clacking tongues, he raised the

hom and blew a deep blast.

Above them the sky clouded darkly and from |

the ground before them there shot up to these
gloomy heavens a pillar of green flames from the
heart of which burst forth Oberon and his Elf
knights, shields before them and naked, burning

swords in their hands.

"Where stands your enemy?" shouted Oberon

and all the field rang with his cry.

Then was Huon ashamed of what he had done
and fearful in his heart of what the Fairy King
would say concerning his foolishness. But he dis-
mounted from his charger and came humbly to
stand before Oberon to confess his fault.

Oberon's face flushed with anger and his green
eyes were as coals of wrath within his head. But
when Huon had confessed with manly readiness
the full sum of his foolishness the Fairy King

shook his head sadly and replied:

"Alas, Huon, many and grave are the dangers
before you and deep will be your sorrow before
you finish with this task. So put aside these child-
ish follies lest you fare so ill that even I cannot
bring you free. Use not the horn again unless you
stand in such peril as you can see of it no easement
but death. Or else I shall take back my gift and
leave you to perish after your own foolish fashion!"

Huon did then swear by the Cross that never
again would he use the gifts lightly, but rather
would he guard them with his life. And Oberon
and his knights retired into the pillar of flame
and so were gone.

56

But Huon and those who followed him rode on
through the countryside until against the sky the
walls and towers of a city were to be seen. There
they determined to spend the night.

57

X. WHICH TELLETH OF THE CITY OF
TORMONT AND WHAT CHANCED
THEREIN

When the knights of France came nigh unto the
gates of the strange city a voice called out to them,
saying:

"By the crosses which ye bear so boldly limned
upon thy shields ye be Christian men. Fly hence,
and that speedily, if ye would keep life within thy
bodies—for this be the City of Tormont and our
lord is one Macaire who hath a great and burning
hate for all Christians and hath sworn that all
who fall into his hands shall be short of a head!"

But Huon called in answer:

"Night is full upon us and we seek shelter. Nor
do we have any fear of your dread lord. Unbar the
gate that we may enter into Tormont."

So did it pass that they came into the city and
on the other side of the gates they found awaiting
them he who had warned them—Gonder, Steward

58

of Tormont, an honest man. And when he saw that
they could not be persuaded to flee beyond the
wrath of Macaire he urged them to go with him
to his own dwelling where they might yet be safe.

Now Tormont was a city of fine houses and tall
towers, but within her streets was a great mul-
titude of beggars and sore was their state so that
Huon and his companions felt much pity for them.
And Huon asked of Gonder why so many suffered
thus. The Steward replied that it was by the will
of Lord Macaire who was deep in all manner of
wickedness.

When they came into Gender's house Huon took
from his belt a purse of gold and gave it into Stew-
ard's hands, saying:

"Taking this and go into the market place, there
buying all meat and bread, such as is necessary
for a feast. Then have hither all these men and
women who beg in the streets and give them to
eat, so that tonight no one within Tormont will
go hungry to bed."

Gonder did as Huon bade him. And from all the
ways of Tormont came the beggars to eat of the
food set out for them. Huon then did bring out the
magic cup and passed it among all that company.
To everyone who ate there it was full of its bounty
and to none did it stand empty. So merry indeed
was the feasting.

As the hour waxed late Huon took from his neck
the chain of the Fairy horn and gave the wcndrous
gift into Gonder's keeping with these words:

"Take thou this horn and treasure it well, that
it may not be lost no matter how merry we become.
For it is the chief of all my holdings and it must
not be taken from me."

59




Gonder did hang the horn about his own neck
and swear to Huon that he would hold it from all
harm.

Now Macaire, the Lord of Tonnont, sent into
the market place the servants of his palace to buy
meat for his table. Shortly they did return to him
saying that there was no meat left to be boughten,
for a stranger had purchased it all for a feast to
be given to the city beggars. And even now all the
poor of the town were eating it in the house of
Gonder.

Much astonished at such tidings Macaire thought
that he must see for himself this outlander who
was feeding the beggars of Tormont. So he did put
on him a long cloak of dusty black, such as the
poorest of the town did wear, and, with his
knights, he went down into the town. Leaving his
men without in the street, he went into Gonder's
house and seated himself humbly at one of the far
tables, looking about him slyly at all that passed.

Now it chanced that shortly after the Lord of
Tormont crept in among them, Huon came to the
table where Macaire had seated himself, bearing
the Fairy cup which he offered to all who sat there.
But when the cup came into Macaire's grasp and
he raised it to drink—lo—the wine was gone and
he held only an empty cup!

"What manner of man art thou?" cried Huon.
"For no honest man does this cup go dry!" Reach-
ing forth his hand he pulled from Macaire's head
the hood of his beggar's cloak.

And Gonder shouted: "He is Macaire, Lord of
Tormont!"

Before they could lay hand upon him Macaire
rushed to the street door and called to his men to

60

come and take these outlanders. But Huon and
the other French knights were not to be so easily
captured. They fought their way out and through
the crowded streets until they won to a strong
watchtower which stood in the very heart of Tor-
mont. There they did set upon the few guardsmen
at its portal and put them to the sword, thus gain-
ing the protection of strong walls.

Outside this tower, Macaire gathered all the
might of Tormont, thinking that in time hunger
and thirst would drive its defenders into his
hands. Huon saw that this might come, for there
was no escape from this hold save through the
forces drawn up against them.

Then did Duke Garyn urge him thus:

"Sound now the horn which King Oberon did
give you—for this is so great a peril that he will
grant your call a rightful one."

Huon put his hand to his breast and in that
moment recollected that he had given the horn
into Gonder's keeping and had it not. When he
told this to the others they did reproach him for
his great folly and he answered them not, for he
knew that what they said to him was true.

But meanwhile Gonder remembered the horn
and how this stranger, now pent within the watch-
tower, had said that it was the chief of his trea-
sures. So he determined to take it to him, since
secretly in his heart Gonder hated the Lord Ma-
caire for the many evils he had wrought,

He went openly to Macaire and said:

"Lord, let me go and speak unto these outland-
ers. Since they trust me, mayhap I can counsel
them into surrender by pointing out in what dire
straits they now lie."

61

Macaire agreed, for he was minded to win the
tower with as little bloodshed as possible and
these strangers had already proved themselves

stout warriors.

62

XI. HOW HUON DID CALL UP THE ELF
KNIGHTS AND OF THE DOOM OF
MACAIRE

Gonder went openly to the gate of the watchtower,
unarmed and bearing no weapons, but carrying
in his hands a scarf of white silk that those within
might know that he came in peace. At Huon's
order the way was unbarred and he came in, to
address the Lord from Bordeaux thus:

"Macaire will have thy heads from thy shoul-
ders if ye surrender to him, therefore listen not
to any promises which he may make thee, for they
will be as false as river quicksand which entrap-
eth the traveler to his doom. Ye can expect no
mercy from him and I can truly see naught before
ye but death. But I have brought hither this horn
which he did entrust to me, saying that it was the
greatest of thy treasures."

Huon fairly snatched the magic horn from Gon-
der, crying aloud:

63




"Good Steward, with this horn you have brought
us our deliverance, as you and all ofTormont shall

now see!"

And putting horn to lip he blew such a blast as

echoed from the towers and walls of all the city,
into the very heart of Heaven itself. With that
sounding came a wind like unto the tempest they
had known in the wood of Fairy.

A sword of fire clove the sky above Tormont and
out of that light came the bat-winged horses of
the Hills ridden by Oberon's forces. Each Elf
knight's sword swung loose in his hand and as
they rode down the wind into the city they cried
aloud the battle cries of their own world which
lies beyond the rim of mortal earth.

At this dread sight those who followed Macaire
were greatly afeared and some fled. But others,
of a stronger breed, stood fast. And Huon and his
men issued forth to do battle with these.

Then began such a clamor as was never before
heard upon this earth. Red streams of brave men's
blood did fill the gutters of the streets and bodies
lay within every doorway and upon every thresh-
old. For there was no stopping the vengeance of
the Elf knights. Nor were the men of France be-
hind them in the harrowing of Tormont. Mighty
were the deeds dc iie by Huon and Garyn and Ger-
ames and those who followed them.

At long last there remained none in the whole
city to stand against them. And chief among the
slain lay Macaire who, evil though his life had
been, fought valiantly against all comers and did
not fall until the very end of the battle. So did
Huon mourn that so brave a man had lived so ill.
When Tormont was cleansed of this false lord

64

and those who had done his wicked will, Oberon
came to Huon and said:

"As we promised, we came to your aid and now
this city has fallen and lies within your hand to
do with as you will. What is your plan for Tor-
mont?"

Huon looked upon this once fair city now torn
and brought to deep suffering through battle, and
he considered before he answered.

"Tormont I do not want, nor do I think that any
of those in my train will wish to reign here, so far
from our native land. Therefore let Gonder, who
is an honest man, rule as Torment's lord. And we
shall go our way."

All those with Huon agreed and thus did the
Steward Gonder become Lord of Tormont. And so
well and long did he rule that in later years Tor-
mont became one of the greatest cities of the Sar-
acen land, to the glory of its people. But never
more did Huon or those wifch him behold its towers
again.

Rather did they go out into the countryside
where Oberon and his Elf knights bid them fare-
well, only first did the Fairy King lay upon Huon
another warning, namely:

"So far upon your quest have you come without
hurt and may it so continue with you. But I fear
that it will not be so for long, for you are a rash
youth and have little knowledge of the world. For-
get not this warning which I give you now, for
your remembrance of it will mean much good or
ill in the future. Speak always the full truth and
let no manner of falsehood pass your lips. For if
you lie you will lose my aid and be your need ever
so great, I shall not come to you."

65

Huon swore loudly that he would do as Oberon
wished, that no falsehood would he utter. But the
Fairy King still looked with sorrow upon him as
if he saw ill coming in the future.

Before he went out from the mortal world Ob-
eron raised up out of the wilderness a fine pavilion
to house all the French company, and brought out
of the air by his magic a goodly banquet for their

feasting.

Now many among them nursed deep wounds
taken in the fighting and when Huon saw their

plight he said:

"Since this quest was laid upon me only, I shall
ride alone to its finish. Stay you here and tend
your hurts until I come again. But if I come not
within the next waxing and waning of the moon,
count me as one dead and bear back to Bordeaux
the story of our faring."

They all cried out against this, but Huon would
not listen to their hot protests. Then, at last, Ger-

ames said:

"Before you now lies the Castle of Dunother
where dwells the Giant Angalafar. Take another
road and avoid this one danger."

But when Huon had bade them all be of good
cheer and farewell, he chose the road to Dunother,
being minded to see the famed hold of the Giant
Angalafar.

66

XU. HOW HUON FARED AT CASTLE
DUNOTHER

Dunother arose gray and grim from a barren
plain. From its stark towers no banners flew and
there was about it an air of ill omen, so that Huon
was half-minded to ride by it. Only to his ears
there sounded a regular thud-thudding noise for
which he could see no source until he came, drawn
by curiosity, to the gate.

There stood, on either side of the portal, two
giants fashioned of steel and brass by a skill which
was that of no mortal man. In the hands of these
giants rested thick clubs of iron and with these
clubs they beat the ground before the gate so that
nothing might pass through and escape horrible
death. Huon watched for a long time but he could
see no instant when one or the other of the clubs
was not in motion.

As he so watched he heard a voice call to him
and, lilting his eyes to the tower above the gate,

67

he saw in a window there a damsel of much beauty
and few years. She did cry upon him to wait, and
shortly after the giants ceased their pounding so
that Huon might ride through the now open gate
to the courtyard where the damsel stood awaiting

him.

When he did dismount and come to her she did

weep most piteously and cling to him, saying:

"Oh, gentle lord, for seven years no mortal man
has ridden hither in answer to my prayers—so
have I served a loathly giant as handmaiden with-
out hope of succor. I pray you, free me from this
fate. Know you I am Sebylle, once a maiden of
high degree in the kingdom of France. But my
father did choose to come to this foul land upon
a holy pilgrimage. And while he was so gone from
me, my lady mother died and I was left desolate.
So did I determine to follow my father. But when
I came into this country I found no man who could
tell me of him. And then the caravan with which
I journeyed was overwhelmed by Angalafar. The
men he killed at once, but he had never before
sighted a Christian maid. So he brought me hither
where I am a serving wench in his household."

Huon's anger quickened as he heard her tale
and he promised in his heart that he would have
the life of Angalafar for the way he had served a
maid of France. So when the maiden came to her-
self and urged him to leave before the Giant re-
turned, he refused all her pleas.

"You will only meet your death because of your
stubbornness," she told him sorrowfully. "For An-
galafar hath a suit of mail which cannot be riven
by any lance or sword forged by man. Wearing it
he cannot be conquered. Nor can another man put

68

T

it on him save by Angalafar's own wish. As long
as he lives will that be so."

When Huon heard this he thirsted greatly for
that suit of mail and vowed that he would have
it from Angalafar, to serve him even as it had
served the Giant for many years. But the maiden
began to mourn as if Huon were already dead
before her eyes and reproached him with his stub-
bornness in not fleeing Dunother before Angalafar
returned.

Bidding her be of good heart Huon lingered
through the day, eating of the fine meats the dam-
sel served him and drinking the wine from his
magic cup. And in the cool of the evening Anga-
lafar returned to the castle, a whole ox held be-
neath his arm as one might carry a pet hare.

Truly a fearsome sight was this monster, being
more than thirty feet tall and having the tusks
of a wild boar to serve him as teeth. But he was
in a good humor because of the ox, so that when
Huon came boldly out before him he did not smite
him instantly but rather roared at him the ques-
tions of who was he and why had he come to Dun-
other.

Huon replied without fear, cheerily enough.

"It is told through this land that you do keep
such a suit of mail as no mortal man has seen—
since it holds its wearer safe from all attack. I am
Huon of Bordeaux, a knight of the realm of France,
who has journeyed hither to see this marvel."

Angalafar was pleased with this answer and he
brought forth from a chest a suit of mail which
shone as if each link within its fashioning had
been cut from gold or silver.

"Look well," he said to Huon, "for this will be

69

your last sight upon earth, since I intend to put

a speedy end to you—"

But Huon allowed no part of the wonder he felt
within him to show upon his face. Rather did he
strive to look most coldly upon the mail as he said:

"So this poor, small thing be that boast of Dun-
other? Faith, by Our Lord, I have seen better in
my own armory of Bordeaux. It is too small to

even cover my shoulders!"

Now at these slighting words Angalafar was
greatly wroth and in his anger he lost the keen-
ness of his wit, for he cried out:

"Put it on thy back, outlander, and see whether
or no it will fit across thy puny boy's shoulders!"

With a high heart Huon did as Angalafar bid
and never had a coat of mail fit him so well. Light
it was as the silk of Cathay and yet as strong as
a brand forged by the olden gods. When he stood
full armed Angalafar demanded:

"Do you not find this now the finest mail you

have ever known?"

"True," replied Huon, drawing his sword. "So
fine is this mail that I do wish it to be mine here-
after. I thank thee right heartily, Angalafar, for

so princely a gift."

Then did Angalafar perceive how he had been
tricked and, with a bellow of rage, he struck at
Huon with his ax. But the stroke fell upon the
coat of mail and to the knight it was but the buffet
of a feather. So it was with all the blows which
the Giant showered upon him until at last, miss-
ing his footing in one blind rush, Angalafar fell
to the floor of the hall. Huon sprang at the fallen
monster and hacked off his head, thus putting an
end to the evil life of this deathly giant.

70

The French knight then called upon the Damsel
Sebylle to come forth from her hiding and greatly
did she rejoice at the sight other captor so brought
to naught and laid low. To her did Huon then give
the Castle of Dunother and all that it contained,
so that she, who had been a serving wench, was
now a lady of much wealth and wide lands. For
himself he did take only the coat of mail which
he wore as he rode on into the land of the Saracens
toward the dread city of Babylon.

71

XIII. OF MALABRON THE SEA BEAST.
AND THE GIANT AGRAPUT

Now it chanced that across the road to Babylon
lay a deep river whereof the waters did rush very
swiftly and the dark current did seem to Huon to
be a trap. Here was no bridge, nor was there any
ford for travelers and the young kriight, having
upon his back the weight of sword, shield and
mail, could see no way of winning through the
flood. So he sat down upon the bank and stared
into the sullen depths of the stream.

Then before his eyes the water were troubled
as if some great creature strove there. And from
the curls of foam arose the naked head and shoul-
ders of a young and comely man. But when the
stranger swam most easily to where Huon rested
upon the bank, lo, he revealed that a scaled tail
served him as lower limbs.

Huon was amazed at such a sight and his sur-


prise was even greater when the river creature
hailed him thus:

"Ho, Huon of Bordeaux, knight of France, I am
Malabron of the realm of Fairy, sent hither by
King Oberon to give you aid."

Then did the knight approach nearer to the
flood to point to that long and shining tail which
Malabron used with as much ease as Huon used
his two legs.

"Art thou man or monster?" the youth from
Bordeaux demanded.

Malabron laughed. "Neither, sir knight. I wear
this strange guise because I have broken the laws
of our immortal world. For a thousand weary
years must I bide so within the boundaries of your
.world and time. And of these years I have served
a full nine hundred and fifty. Now shall we corn
sider your straits—Behold, Huon!"            •

With those words Malabron did clap together
his hands, making a loud sound which could be
heard even above the roaring of the river. And
straightway there came from out of the water it-
self a fine boat well made and cleverly fashioned
to withstand the beating of the water.

Into this Huon did lead his charger, although
the beast did rebel against such travel and needs
must be constrained to it with many soothing
words. Once the knight and his mount were safe
aboard, Malabron did grasp with his white teeth
the rope which was fastened to the bow. And faster
than any mortal might, he swam'through the river
waters, towing behind him the boat. So was Huon
brought to the far side of the river.

When he had disembarked from the boat he

thanked Malabron. But the fish-man shook his
head against such words, saying in turn:

"Nay, thank me not, Huon of Bordeaux. For by
this service to you have I won fifty years remit-
tance from my exile. Now am I free to return to
my own land. So rather be my thanks yours. When
we meet again I shall be in my proper place among
King Oberon's lords. Therefore, all manner of good
luck be yours for this day's work and may you
have the good fortune you deserve!"

With that Malabron sank into the stream and
was gone, although Huon called upon him twice
or thrice, being ill at ease alone in this strange
and desolate land. For by crossing the river he
had come into a desert where there seemed to be
no other living thing.

But ere he had ridden a full half league he came
across footprints in the sand. And so large were
these prints that he knew no living man but a
giant or monster had made them. Thus he was not
surprised to find, upon riding around the edge of
a bare rock cliff, a giant sitting in the sand and
whetting a twelve-foot sword on a stone.

Now this was the Giant Agraput who was
brother to that same Angalafar whom Huon had
slain. And when he saw Huon he recognized the
coat of mail which the knight wore. So did he take
the young man to be some messenger sent by his -
brother. And he called to Huon in such a voice as
rang from the cliffs like a war trumpet:

"How does my brother, Angalafar? And why has

he sent you hither?"

Huon made answer as best he might, saying:

"Angalafar bides quietly at Dunother (which

was the truth for he lay at peace in a courtyard
grave there) and I ride for Babylon."

But of his mission he said nothing since he could
not speak the truth and he held in mind Oberon's
warning against uttering that which was false.

"Good indeed is it then that Fate has brought
us to this meeting," boomed Agraput, "for I am
held in high fear in those parts and, since my
brother has given you his fine coat of mail to wear,
I can do no less than to give you this." And he
tossed to Huon a ring of red gold which he pulled
from his finger and which was so large that the
knight needs must set it about his wrist.

"Show that to any who would bar your way at
the gates of Babylon. For Gaudys, the Emir of that
city, owes me a half year's tribute and you can
remind him of that when you are finished with
the task my good brother has set you."

Huon promised that he would do as Agraput
asked and with the Giant's ring upon his arm he
went on his way.

Soon the track he followed led out of this harsh
and barren wasteland into a green country where
trees of ripening fruit overhung the roads and
peasants tilled rich fields. Here did Huon rest the
night and ease his mount from weary travel. And
he marveled at all that had chanced since he had
ridden forth from his keep of Bordeaux. So think-
ing of his home he did feel the tears rise to his
eyes and he knew the pain of an aching heart. For
he longed to see once more his gentle mother, the
good Duchess Aclis (not knowing that now she lay
in her deep tomb) and his brother Gerard who was
even then ruling Bordeaux with a stern and heavy
hand.

XIV. HOW HUON SPAKE FALSELY
AND THE EVIL THAT CAME TO HIM
THEREFOR

Wearing the armor of Angalafar and the ring
which was Agraput's, Huon came to the gates of
Babylon. To the first guardsman he did show the
ring, saying naught lest speech betray him as a
stranger to this land, and so great was the fear
of Agraput in the city that he was passed freely
through the portal. But when he came to a second
gate the sentry there raised a spear against him
and bade him tell who he was and from. whence

he came.

The French knight replied shortly that he was

one Huon and that he had weighty business with
the Emir Gaudys. Then he also held forth his wrist
that the sentry might see the Giant's ring. The
Saracen did bow low but still held his place bar-
ring the road, saying:

"The Giant Agraput is indeed a great lord and

much esteemed by our Emir. But those who serve
him are many and not always of our kind. This
is a high feast day for the followers of the Prophet
and no unbeliever must lie within our walls at
this time. So I must ask you, stranger, are you of
our true faith?"

Huon, being impatient and wishful to win into
the city, answered quickly, "Aye."

Nor was it until he was within the walls of
Babylon that he bethought himself that he had
spoken that which was false. So was he in some
unease of mind, remembering how Oberon had so
sternly warned him against that sin. But he com-
forted himself with the belief that his fault had
come through impatience and not because he had
willed to err and he hoped that for such an excuse
the Fairy King would not forsake him.

However, at that moment King Oberon, sitting
at ease in his court, cried aloud so that his chief
lord Gloriant asked if he felt some pang. And Ob-
eron made sorrowful answer thus:

"Aye, deep into my heart has struck a spear of
pain, for that youth, Huon of Bordeaux, whom I
love as a brother, hath broken his pledged word.
With black falsehood upon his lips has he ridden
into Babylon. And there he is fated to fall into
such danger as will claim his life. So shall he call
upon me for aid in his extremity, but I cannot go
to him. Unless Our Lord Jesu Himself hold out
His Hand, Huon be sped!"

And so great was his grief that he went out from
the company of his lords and abode alone, weep-
ing, for many hours' space.

But in Babylon Huon rode on to the Emir's pal-
ace, no man saying him nay, for all saw Agraput's

ring and thought the young knight to be the
Giant's rightful messenger.

Now Gaudys had spread a feast for all comers,
since he was minded that day to betroth his
daughter Claramonde to the Dey of Hircania.
Upon his right hand was the Dey seated and there
was much mirth and joy among the company—
until Huon did enter, his shield ready upon his
shoulder, his unsheathed sword in his hand. All
marveled to see an armed man come into them as
if he sought some sworn enemy there. But the
Emir, seeing the ring about the youth's wrist,
thought him the messenger of Agraput whom all
there feared and he arose to bid the stranger cour-
teous welcome.

Only, before he could speak the words which
lay upon his tongue, Huon did tread lightly to the
side of Claramonde and, raising her up from her
seat, did kiss her full upon her lips even as Char-
lemagne had ordered him.

Then he turned quickly and, with his naked
sword, he smote off the head of the Dey so that it
rolled across the feast table to the very fingers of
Gaudys.

"Villain! What foul mischief is this?" shouted
the Emir. "Who art thou to dare such a deed?"

"I am Huon of Bordeaux, knight and peer of
France, and liege man to King Charlemagne. My
lord has laid upon me this task, that I must kiss
upon the mouth your fair daughter, strike from
his shoulders the head of the most noble lord at
your table, and take a fistful of hair from your
beard and five of your great teeth!"

At first the Emir thought Huon a mad man, but
when the Frenchman stretched forth his hand to

78

seize upon Gaudys' beard, the Emir cried aloud
for his guard to overpower the stranger. Now did
Huon raise the horn of Oberon and blow so deep
a blast that the sound rang in the ears of all the
city. But no clouds gathered in answer, no light-
ning flashed, no Elf knights rode the steeds of
storm. And Huon knew that his falsehood was
held against him. So he threw the horn from him,
crying:

"Small was my fault, King Oberon, born of
thoughtless folly rather than of willful evil. But
if now I am doomed to fall beneath the swords of
these Saracens, may you long remember how you
left me to my death!"

Then, with his shield before him and his sword
swinging in his hand, he did fight most valiantly.
But, at last, by sheer weight of numbers, was he
overcome. Swiftly was he bound and taken to a
deep dungeon, there left in chains to starve by the
will of Gaudys.

But the Lady Claramonde was troubled in her
heart and went to her couch that night uneasy in
mind and body, thinking much of Huon's fair
youth and his great comeliness which was such
as few maidens could be indifferent to. And, since
she had secretly hated the old Dey of Hircania,
who had been her father's friend and not hers, she
felt most kindly toward the man who had rid her
of such a husband. So sleep came not and she
turned many times upon her pillows, until she
could no longer lie there. She arose and put on a
long cloak of black so that in the shadows of the
night no one could mark her passing.

Taking with her a small basket of meat and
bread and a jar of water, she stole down the

79

hundred dark steps into the dungeons of the Emir.
There she did pacify the stupid sentry with a gold
piece so that he unbarred the door of Huon's cell
that she might look upon the notable captive. Se-
cretly she gave to the prisoner the food and drink,
and he thought that surely within the whole mor^
tal world there was nowhere else so fair or kind

a maiden.                          ,1   ..
And then was the great love between these two

born. And of that love came much sorrow and
much joy for both—as is the way of love between
man and maid.

XV. HOW GAUDYS WAS OVERBORNE
AND HUON GAINED HIS HEART'S
DESIRE

While Huon lay so pent in his foul prison, those
who had followed him from France and those who
loved him well, namely Duke Garyn and the
Knight Gerames, grew fearful of his fate. For
Huon returned not to them at the time he had
appointed. Instead of taking ship for France as
their leader had ordered them to do, they decided
to ride on toward Babylon that they might gain
news of him.

When they came nigh to the Saracen city Ger-
ames said to Duke Garyn:

"Do you and these other knights and squires
remain here well hid, for no man in this land
looking upon you would not know you for out-
landers. But I have lived here for many years and
if I put on the clothing of a desert chieftain none
will learn my disguise is false. So clad I can win
into the very court of the Emir and discover how
it has fared there with Huon, good or ill."

To this plan the Duke Garyn did agree, seeing
the wisdom of it. And Gerames did put on him the
robes of a desert chieftain and rode alone through
the gate of Babylon.

He went into the court of the Emir, telling the
sentries that he was an envoy sent to Babylon by
the Caliph Ivoryn, who was full brother to Gaudys.
This did delight the Emir exceedingly, for he had
long been wishful to have tidings from his brother.
And he had Gerames brought to him, showing him
all manner of honor and ordering a feast to be
given to celebrate his coming to the city.

Now as they sat eating and drinking Gerames
began cunningly to talk of feats of arms and of
the mighty warriors he had known and of their
skill in battle. Until at length Gaudys said:

"Aye, mighty indeed were these men of whom
you have spoken so well. But there was a dog of
a Christian who, within this very room, held off
half my guards before he could be pulled down."

At these words Gerames' heart leaped within
his breast for he knew that Gaudys spoke ofHuon.
And he demanded to know what had become of so
brave a warrior.

"He lies beneath my dunghill," returned Gaudys.
"For when neither food nor drink was given, him,
he did as all mortals—left this world and his body
speedily enough. And so we are well rid of him!"

Then was Gerames cast down. And he thought
that all he had now to live for was revenge upon
this Emir who had served Huon so cruelly, even
to the boy's death. But of his thoughts he spoke
none aloud.

When the feast was done and it was late at
night, the Lady Claramonde did creep forth from

82

her chamber with meat and drink hid beneath her
cloak. And, as she passed along the dark halls,
Gerames sighted her. Wondering at her employ
he followed her, even into the dungeon where
Huon lay.

And, seeing the youth still living, a mighty cry
of joy burst from Gerames' throat, afrighting the
lady and greatly astonishing Huon. But when the
old knight threw aside the hood of his cloak and
Huon knew that he was the faithful Gerames, the
young man rejoiced.

Swiftly he did tell Gerames how the Lady Clar-
amonde had saved him from death by starvation
and had persuaded the jailer to set out the body
of a prisoner, dead from the fever, as Huon's own,
so that all the court believed him dead and buried.

Each night had Claramonde urged him with
many tears and lamentations to flee Babylon. But
without the teeth and hair of Gaudys he would not
go. And so had it been to the coming of Gerames.

Having heard the lady's pleas and the firm re-
fusal of Huon, Gerames asked why the young
knight had not asked help from King Oberon. Red
then with shame was Huon's face and low hung
his head as he made true confession of his sin of
falsehood.

"Hard has been your lot since that hour and
much has been your suffering," mused Gerames.
"Who knows what lies within the mind of the Elf
King? Were you to freely acknowledge your fault
and ask humbly for pardon—mayhap he would
come to do you service once more. In the hall of
the Emir now hangs that horn which was taken
from you. Come, let us take it once more. And if

83

we fail we shall fall at the sword's point, which
is fair enough ending for any belted knight!"

Thus heartened by Gerames' words they crept
forth into the hall of the Emir and Huon lifted
down the silver horn. But ere he could set it to lip,
there burst upon them divers members of the
guard. Gerames leapt out with unsheathed sword
to ward off the attack, shouting:

"Sound the horn! And if it be Our Lord's will
let King Oberon answer!"

Out rang the blast of the horn, its notes reach-
ing to high Heaven and to the depths of Hell, so
that all who heard, mortal or spirit, were shaken.
Nor couldJOberon hold fast against that summon-
ing, for he who blew did so with a humble and

contrite heart.

So did the hosts of Fairy descend upon Babylon
and those who dared to stand against them were
slain. But those who begged for mercy were spared

the sword.

In the hall Huon strove shield to shield with
Gaudys. Nor was the fight an easy one, for Gaudys
was a mighty man of arms, renowned through all
the width of the Saracen lands. And Huon trod
warily, the bright sparks of fire flying from his
armor under the blows of the Emir.

But in the end Huon, with one last strong blow,
brought down the Emir of Babylon and from the
fallen man's jaw did he smite out the white teeth,
from his chin he cut the wiry beard.

And these hairs and teeth Oberon did place
within a golden box which he gave unto Gerames,
ordering him to guard them with his life until
they came again into the court of Charlemagne.

XVI. HOW HUON RETURNED TO
FRANCE AND GERARD PLOTTED EVIL

Having gained the teeth and beard of Gaudys and
otherwise fulfilled the quest Charlemagne had set
him, Huon and his followers now took ship for
Rome. And there, by the Holy Father himself, was
the young knight wed to Claramonde. Now Huon
was impatient to reach Bordeaux once more and,
chancing to hear of a ship bound for France, he
took passage on it for himself, his Lady, and Ger-
ames. As the ship was a small one there was no
place aboard her for the other knights and squires
of his train and they decided to return to France
by marching over land, the longer way.

Now when Huon had safely come again to a
French port he sent a swift messenger to Bordeaux
to tell Gerard of his homecoming. And out of that
act came much sorrow for Huon and his fair lady.

For all these months when Huon had been swal-
lowed up in the land of the Saracens, Gerard had

deemed him dead and had had himself proclaimed
Duke and overlord of Bordeaux. In this wicked-
ness was he upheld by Gylberde, the father of his
wife and as black a villain as ever trod the fields

of France.

When Huon's messenger came to the keep of

Bordeaux, Gerard knew the keen bite of fear, for
he believed that his brother would be greatly
wsoth with him when he discovered how ill mat-
ters had gone with the duchy. So Gerard sent the
messenger into a private room and stationed a
guard before the door thereof so that none might
have word with the man. But Gerard himself has-
tened-ee-Gylberde for counsel.

Gylberde was also frightened, for he had not
dealt justly with certain men of Bordeaux and
there would be many voices raised against him
should Huon return to rule there. So he spoke in

this wise to Gerard:

"All this land knows the heat of your brother's :

anger and the heaviness of his hand when he has
cause to raise it against- any man. If he comes,
again to Bordeaux surely he will not deal softly
with you—since there will be full many to sing
aloud fancied wrongs. Also, if he is again Duke
of Bordeaux, you will be only a landless nothing
without a place to lay your head—"

At those words the Lady Roselyn, she who was
wife to Gerard and daughter to Gylberde, lifted
her voice in loud argument, saying that she had
not wed to share a beggar's couch and crust, and
that Gerard dared not use her so but must keep
her Lady Duchess of Bordeaux. Mightily did she
rage and employ all her wiles until her husband
was fain to give into her two hands the moon itself

86

if she would only cease. So he turned to Gylberde
for the second time and demanded what he must
do to keep Huon from Bordeaux.

"Time has not cooled the ire of King Charle-
magne against your brother nor in any way has
his heart been softened. And is it not true that
the doom he laid upon Huon, should he rashly
return without fulfilling the quest, was death?
Therefore, do you go secretly to Huon, taking with
you no squire or other outrider, since the fewer
tongues which may speak of this the better. Dis-
cover from Huon's own lips how matters stand
with him.

"If he has truly accomplished that which the
King ordered him to do—then lead him home by
the lower road in the east valley and there I shall
lie in wait with my men to take him and those
with him captive. We will bring them here to the
keep of Bordeaux, traveling by night so that no
one along the way may see who it is we hold in
bonds. And here shall we keep them close until
such a time as we can decide what is to be done."
' To this plot Gerard agreed willingly enough, so
lost to all good had his envy and the power of his
wife made him, and he did just as Gylberde urged.
Without knight or squire he stole out of the city
and rode to that abbey where Huon, his lady wife,
and Gerames were resting. Nor did Gylberde lin-
ger in Bordeaux but hurried forth on another
track with a goodly band of desperate men who
were sworn to obey him in all things.

As Gerard came into the courtyard of the abbey
Huon ran forth to greet him joyfully, embracing
his brother and calling down all manner of good
fortune upon the younger man, saying:

87




"Not the least of the blessings which Our Lord
hath granted me is this meeting with you, my
dear brother. Tell me, how does our mother? Why
comes she not with you?"

Then did Gerard hang his head low, for, villain
though he now was, he had greatly loved the
Duchess Aclis and it hurt him deeply to speak of
her death as he must. And when Huon heard how
that noble lady had been stricken down at the tale
of his misfortunes at court, he was in turn as one
smitten dumb and could only gaze pitifully inton
the shifting eyes of Gerard.

Beneath that piteous appeal Gerard moved un-
happily as might an ox threatened with a goad,
and he hastened to ask concerning the success of
his brother's mission. Absent were Huon's replies
for his thoughts were still with the Duchess Aclia.
But from his halting words Gerard learned that
the news was as ill as his fears had painted it.
Huon had performed the task set him by the King
and was even now about to ride to court with the
proof.

So Gerard hastened to suggest that he join
Huon's small party, so he might witness his
brother's triumph at court. Huon agreed, but with
a heavy heart, for it would be a triumph emptied
now of all joy.

By Gerard's urging they rode forth on the valley
road, Huon and Gerames mounted on war charg-
ers and Claramonde riding upon a strong white
mule. But ere they had gone a league beyond the
abbey walls, they were attacked by Gylberde and
his men. And, when Huon saw even his brother's
sword turned against him, he lost heart, threw
away his weapons and allowed himself to be

88

taken. So did Huon enter again his city of Bor-
deaux, not triumphantly before the faces of his
people, but secretly at night, bound to the saddle
of his own horse. And with him rode Gerames and
Claramonde in like distress.

But Gerard was on his way to the King's court
with a black plan in his traitor heart.

89

XVII. HOW HUON STOOD IN GREAT
PERIL AND GERAMES SUMMONED
OBERON FOR THE LAST TIME

Gerard came to the court of King Charlemagne
and there spake aloud before all the company, say-
ing:

"Lord King, it was thy will long months ago to
lay upon my brother, Huon, a perilous quest—
namely to go into Babylon of the Saracens and
there smite off the head of the chief man who sat
upon the right hand of the Emir, to lay upon the
mouth of the Emir's daughter a free kiss, and to
take as tribute from Gaudys himself a handful of
beard and five of his teeth. These was he to bring
hither to hold before your eyes in token of his
deeds. But, unless he accomplish this, he was not
to return to the realm of France unless he wished
to part speedily with his head and his life."

King Charlemagne nodded. "Even as you have
said, it is so. But why do you recall to our minds

90

r

on this day the punishment of that traitor who
doubtless long since was meat for crows?"

Then did Gerard yield to the blackness in his
heart and made answer in this wise:

"Not so, Lord King. At this very hour Huon lies
in the keep of Bordeaux awaiting thy pleasure.
• And whatsoever thou dost order—the same shall
be done unto him!"

At this cruel speech several of the lords and
peers did grow red and white in the face with
shame—to hear brother so denounce brother to
sure and sudden death. And amongst these was
that Duke Naymes who had once stood good friend
to Huon and was now determined to fight for him
again. So that now he did speak out quickly.

"Mayhap Huon hath done as he was bade and
was returning to report his deeds," he began.

But Gerard interrupted him in great haste.

"Nay. Knowing that no living man might per-
form such acts as the King ordered, he but kept
beyond the borders of France until he hoped that
the memory of his foul deeds had grown dim in
all men's minds. Then did he venture back se-
cretly, trusting that I would prove as false a rogue
as he and give him shelter against the just wrath
of the King. But instead I have put him in ward
and have ridden hither to know the King's will."

Now in these months Charlemagne's wrath
against Huon had grown no less or lighter and,
when Gerard had done, he thundered forth that
Huon was to die a traitor's death as soon as pos-
sible.

But Naymes, and those other peers who thought
shame of this business, cried aloud that Huon
should not be so cruelly used without a hearing.

91

And as they spake so strongly, with flashing eyes
and flushed cheeks, the King was forced to their
will and agreed to journey to Bordeaux where
Huon lay in prison, there hear the unfortunate
youth's own story.

And so the court went to Bordeaux and this was
to the liking of neither Gerard nor Gylberde, who
feared that by some trick of fate Huon would win
free of the trap they had set for him.

In Bordeaux, Huon, the Lady Claramonde, and
the faithful Gerames were brought out of prison
into the light of day and piteous it was to see their
hard plight. Many there were among the lords of
the court who said privately to one another that
there seemed to be little evil in these three.

Then one Gaulter, a knight of mean degree and
distantly kin to Gylberde, arose to demand that
Huon suffer the full penalty of the law. And to
this plea Gylberde nodded happy assent. Gerard
would have spoken likewise but, with his brother's
eyes upon him, he could make no sound and his
lying words were thrust back into his throat until
he thought himself nigh strangled by them. So he
said nothing, but of him only did Huon seem
aware. And when the youth spoke it was directly
to his false brother.

"Know you, when our lord king laid upon me
this heavy task I did go out of France to His Ho-
liness, the Pope, in Rome. And with his holy bless-
ing I sailed unto the shores of that land which is
thrall to the Saracen host."

Then did he relate all those adventures and
misadventures which had befallen him—even as
are set down in this chronicle. And all those hear-


ing marveled at his tale which was strange indeed
to their ears.

When Huon had done he looked away from Ger-
ard for the first time, holding up his head to face
the King fully, even as an honest man would
stand. And so he waited for the verdict of Char-
lemagne.

But Gylberde, fearing the sympathy which the
tale had aroused in the court, shouted;

"If this villain speaks true—where is the beard
and where are the teeth of Gaudys? Let him show
them now."

Huon turned again to Gerard and spake sor-
rowfully:

"Nay, I have them not. They were wrested from
the good Sir Gerames by you, my brother. If all
love be not wholly dead between us, I pray you
now, bring forth the casket that I may not be fore-
sworn before the lords of France."

But Gerard stirred not, although within him he
was sick and faint with terror. For that evil which
he had surrendered to held him fast in this last
hour when he might have redeemed his soul—held—
him hard fast in his allegiance to the Ruler of
Darkness whose vassal he had become.

And when Gerard did not answer that petition,
Huon uttered a moan of sadness and covered his
face with his hands as if he could no longer bear
to look upon his brother. But Gerames, seeing
Huon so stricken, acted for him. And from the
young knight's belt he plucked the horn ofOberon
to put it to his lips and blow. And that bugling
seemed to rift apart both the hall in which they
stood and the sky above it.

XVHI. OF THE TRIUMPH OF HUON
AND THE FAIR PROMISE OF OBERON

Out of the riven sky there did descend to the earth
of France, even into the city of Bordeaux, Oberon,
King and Liege Lord of Fairyland, together with
those Fairy lords and Elf knights who did him
service.

King Charlemagne and his peers stood dumb-
struck at such a sight. And no man dared to move
as Oberon put forth his sword and touched those
chains which bound Huon, his lady, and Gerames.

Straightway those chains were as dust and the
rising wind puffed them away so the three were
free, no man putting out hand against them. Ger-
ard and Gylberde were sore afraid at this sight
and their limbs shook with their terror, for none
might know the will of the Fairy lord or what
punishment he would lay upon those who had
harmed his friends.

But Oberon clapped together his naked hands

94

and at that sharp sound there came to Huon,
through the air, that gold box containing the
beard and teeth of Gaudys. And this coffer Oberon
bade him open that all there might see that he
had faithfully served Charlemagne.

When the King looked upon that coffer and
heard all that Huon had undergone, his heart was
moved. And Oberon, marking this, spoke sharply:

"Brother King, even as you reign here within
the boundaries of France, so do I reign among the
People of the Hills in that land which few mortals
have ever seen. And since I grow weary of my
crown, which is full heavy now as it was not in
the days of my youth, I am fain to depart hence,
even into Paradise as was promised me centuries
ago. The time of my passing is not yet, though the
shadow of it lies upon me now. But when I am
summoned, then shall I in turn call unto me this
youth whom I have proved to be of loyal heart,
brave and true beyond the like of most mortals,
and he shall be lord over my people and rule for-
ever in the misty valleys and cloud mountains of
Elf Land. This do I proclaim before your nobles
and mine, and this shall be!"

While they yet marveled at his speech, Oberon
leaned far from his saddle and kissed Huon upon
the brow as if they were brothers in blood. And
so did he also to Claramonde and from that day
forward neither did the Duke nor his lady show
any mark of age or know any bodily ill. Rather
were they possessed of a beauty beyond that of
mankind and of eternal youth.

So having laid upon Huon the wardship of his
kingdom, Oberon and his men went out of France,
never more to be seen by King Charlemagne and

95

his court. But there were sighs at their going for
their like is viewed only once in mayhap a thou-
sand years.

Seeming to stir as if from a dream, the King
cam& again to himself and, looking upon the luck-
less Gerard, his anger awoke, for he realized that
this weak and evil youth and Gylberde would have
used the royal power to pull down Huon in order
to serve their own ends. Thereupon Charlemagne
ordered that these two false knights be dragged
away and hung. And no one in all that company
raised his voice in their behalf—save only Huon,
since he could not forget that Gerard was his
brother. But none paid him heed and the King's
orders were speedily carried out. So perished these
two traitors in the web they had spun for another.

But Huon was named again Duke of Bordeaux
and peer of France, and was left to rule in peace,
his gentle Duchess by his side.

ADVENTURE
THE SECOND

96

1: HOWHUON WENT FORTH TO
BATTLE AND THE LADY CLARAMONDE
RECEIVED THE PILGRIMS

Once more did Duke Huon rule in his city of Bor-
deaux, and withJiim sat his fair lady Duchess, in
their hearts being much gladness and joy. All the
divers counts and lords who were vassal to Huon
came then into that city and paid him homage
and pledged him faith and loyalty—saving only
the Count Angelars.

Now this Angelars was kinsman to that foul
traitor Amaury, whom Huon had slain in fair
fight before King Charlemagne, and greatly did
he hate Huon for that slaying. So now did he for-
tify his castle and hold it against bis-rightful lord,
swearing that to the Duke he would never render
homage while he had life in his body.

And when these rash words were reported to
him HUGH'S anger did wax strong against Ange-
lars. And he summoned into his service such
knights and men-at-arms as he knew to be true

99

men and eager for battle. With such in his train
he put on that mail which he had won from the
Giant Angalafar and took up the sword he had
had from his father, the Duke Sevin. Then he
sought out Claramonde in her bower, where she
rested with all her maidens about her, and spoke
to her in this wise:

"My fair lady wife, now do I ride to put to shame
this foul traitor Angelars. And while I be gone
from Bordeaux do you hold in your two hands the
rule of this city. All men shall be servants unto
you and your will within these gates shall be as
mine."

"Lord Duke," Claramonde made answer, "sad
grows my heart to see you with mail girt upon
your body and a sword belted about you. For the
chances of war are diverse and evil. But if it be
your true will to punish this traitor then I shall
say no more. May the Good Lord Jesu hold you
ever free from harm and bring you safely back to
me. As for Bordeaux, be assured that all shall be
done here even as if you yourself sat in the hall
of justice from sunrise to sunset."

So did these two part and Huon led his men out
of the city toward that keep which Angelars had
fortified and held, in defiance of his rightful lord.
And there the men of Bordeaux did encompass the
castle and begin an assault.

But the same day that Huon did depart out of
Bordeaux there came into that city another com-
pany of men. And these were pilgrims from Ala-
mayne returning home from the Holy Land where
they had visited the Tomb of Our Lord Jesu and
looked upon the places where the Prince, of Peace
had been both quick and dead.

100

The Lady Claramonde looking forth from the
window of her tower chamber saw these pilgrims
who were worn and suffering by reason of their
long journeying. And she asked what manner of
travelers they were. To her was made answer that
they were pilgrims newly come from the Holy
Land.

So did she then give orders that they be brought
into the great hall of the castle and that to them
be given meat and drink and new clothing, should
they need such. And she herself did go in to serve
them with her maids and men. Of this charity
came great peril and suffering to Claramonde and
those she loved most, as you shall see.

Now the pilgrims rejoiced at the manner of their
treatment and as they went on to their own coun-
try they ever spoke aloud the praises of the Duch-
ess Claramonde, saying that of all the highborn
ladies she was the fairest and best they had ever
seen. When they came to their home in Alamayne
they met with the Duke Raoul who was their liege
lord, this same Raoul being nephew and heir to
the Emperor and well beloved by him. But he was
a young man of hot passions and took little heed
of the rights of lesser men.

And he did ask of the pilgrims the full tale of
their wanderings which they did take great plea-
sure in telling him. Then did the leader of the pil-
grims stand forth and say:

"Lord Duke, long and far have we journeyed
and many and great are the sights we have seen
in that journeying. But in our hearts do we cherish
the memory of the city of Bordeaux."

"And why do you so?" asked the Duke, amazed,
for he did not deem that city of any account.

101

"Because, Lord Duke, when we came into that
city, hungry and weary nigh unto death itself, the
Lady Duchess Claramonde, she who is wife to the
Duke Huon, did have us into the great hall of the
castle. And with her own hands she brought unto
us meat and drink and new clothing—if such we

needed.

"And of all the ladies we did ever see she is the
fairest—even the angels who sit now in the Halls
of Heaven might well wish to be fashioned as is
she. As she is fair so is she also courteous and in
all ways fit to rule. She is duchess in Bordeaux,
but she is meet to be a queen in a greater land.
Would, Lord Duke, that she might be your wife
and so our own dear lady!"

Duke Raoul, hearing this, was fired to see this
lady who had so courteously used his people. Many
times he thought upon the pilgrim's words until,
at length, he knew that he must go even to Bor-
deaux and look upon the Lady Claramonde with
his own eyes. Summoning unto him his chief lords,
he made known his will in this wise:

"Since I haye heard such things concerning this
fair Duchess of Bordeaux I cannot rest in sleep,
nor does my meat have any savor in my mouth.
I have no lady to share my rule and never had I
knowledge before of any who is counted so much
a peer among her kind. Therefore I must view this
marvel for myself."

Then he did put off his fine robes and his sword.
And with stain he blackened his face and let his
beard grow upon his chin. So that when he put on
him the cloak of a common man he was of rough
and poor seeming. In this wise he went to Bor-
deaux and there he did beg alms at the gate of the

102

castle, saying that he was a pilgrim from the Holy
Land.

So the steward, following the orders of his lady,
brought him into the great hall where the Duchess
sat at meat with all her household. And she re-
ceived him courteously, giving unto him bread
from her own plate. But he could not eat thereof
for reason of looking upon her, and he thought
that it was true that even Heaven's angels might
well wish to appear in the seeming of the Duchess
Claramonde.

Then he did know a great longing and love for
her which was like a fire lit within him, and he
did swear privately that he would have her to wife
or die. For he deemed Huon a small lordling of
little account whom he could easily dispose of. And
with these thoughts making evil and black his
heart he departed again for his own land.

103

//. HOW THE DUKE RAOUL DID PLOT
AND OF HUON'S ANSWER THERETO

Having set his heart upon gaining the Lady Clar-
amonde to wife, Duke Raoul straightway rode
unto the court of his uncle, the Emperor of Ala-
mayne. And the Emperor rejoiced to see his
nephew, coming to embrace him and do him all
honor before those assembled there, saying:

"My dear kinsman, joyful are we to give you
welcome. And if we can in any way serve you, you
have but to make known your wishes here."

The Duke Raoul knelt before the Emperor in
most humble seeming and paid him homage, be-
fore he spoke aloud what was in his mind and
what he had been planning since he looked upon
the face of the Lady Claramonde.

"Sire, many knights ride in your train and sit
in your halls, owing you liege service and all fi-
delity. Mayhap these be the most skillful and best
warriors of all Christendom. It is in my mind that

104

if a tournament be given here to which the knights
of France, aye, even the knights of England and
Spain, be bidden to show their skill—yet even
then shall these of your following triumph in the
lists and great shall be the glory of the men of
Alamayne!"

The Emperor thought upon these words of Duke
Raoul and to him also it did appear a pleasant and
notable plan, and straightway he did agree that
this would be so. And he caused to be sent out to
the four ways of the world heralds and trumpeters
to proclaim the giving of such a tournament to be
held at his city of Mayence within the half year.

But Raoul smiled secretly to himself and, when
again among those of his own household, being
full merry with the wine he had drunk that night,
he gave open voice to the dark plotting he had
done, so that divers of his lords heard him say:

"This Huon of Bordeaux has been widely bespo-
ken as a man of war, full of cunning and high
deeds. Such a man will not remain aloof from the
Emperor's tournament. And he is hardly more
than a green youth in years, while I have spent
many seasons in the field. Thus when I shall chal-
lenge him to -single combat let no man fear the
ending. Huon shall die beneath my sword and his
lands and lady will drop into my hands as easily
as the ripe fruit falls from its parent tree in the
proper season."

Among those lords who listened to this unwor-
thy boasting was one Godrun of Noremberg who
in his boyhood had served as a page in the house-
hold of Duke Sevin of Bordeaux. And many had
been the kindnesses shown him there. Also he had
sported with Huon when they had both been lads

105

scarce out of childhood and together they had
learned to swing swords and hold lances, giving
many a stout blow to each other during that learn-
ing. So that Godrun-now looked upon Duke Raoul
with much disfavor and determined in his heart
that this fell plan would be spoiled if he could
have the doing of it.

He called his squire and together they slipped
away from the Emperor's court and rode with all
speed into France and even into the city of Bor-
deaux with little rest or food and drink to sustain
them.

Now Huon had encompassed the keep held in
defiance by Angelars and, although those within
fought bravely and with much spirit, yet were
they in the end defeated and the keep taken. Then
did Huon hang the traitor Angelars upon his own
high tower and with him divers of his captains.
But he freed those of the common sort who had
but served their lord in this bad business. Having
done so he returned to Bordeaux, meeting on the
way those heralds who had been sent out by the
Emperor to summon all the knights of Christen-
dom to the tournament at Mayence. And hearing
of this Huon and his men were much pleased and
decided to go thither at the proper time to win
honor and glory for the realm of France.

The Duchess Claramonde knew great joy and
happiness when her lord returned thus speedily
to her without hurt and she caused a feast to be
made so that all might partake and so share in
. her pleasure. To this feast came Godrun of No-
remberg, all unknowing, with his distressful
knowledge of the plot against his friend. He con-

106

trived to have speech privately with Duke Huon
and his lady.

"Lord Duke, in former years when your father,
the mighty Sevin, still walked this earth, I dwelt
happily in these halls as one of his fosterlings.
You I did know well then and ofttimes we did
strive together in sport. Now it is with shame and
sorrow that I come into your presence with such
a story on my lips.

"For know you this—now am I liege man to that
Duke Raoul who is nephew to the Emperor of
Alamayne. And this Raoul is a mighty lord in
battle, none of the knights of Christendom has
been able to stand against him lance to lance,
sword to sword, shield to shield, and come the
better from the encounter. But in other ways he
is not so great a man.

"Hearing tales of the beauty and courtesy of
this lady, your Duchess, he put on him the sorry
guise of a pilgrim and came even into this very
hall. Beholding the lady, he coveted her to be his
wife and is determined to make his wishes in this
matter true. You he holds of little account because
of your youth and because Bordeaux is not as large
as the fief he rules. So he has caused his uncle,
the Emperor, to proclaim a tournament to draw
you to Mayence where he may challenge you to
single combat and kill you, taking both your lady
and your land unto himself!"

Now, upon hearing this, the heart of Huon did
swell with red rage that such an insult should be
laid upon his lady and upon him. And he drew out
his sword so that the torchlight in the hall did fall
full upon his blade as he cried:




"Should this black-hearted Duke have a hundred

107

full armed knights in his train and I stand alone
but for this blade, yet will I face him in battle!"

And the Duchess Claramonde rose in her place,
her eyes, too, full of the fire of war. And she said:

"Husband, right well do you speak! This Raoul
is no true knight, nay, by his action he denies the
very sword and spurs he wears. So hot am I
against him that I would I might put on coat-mail
and helm and ride at your right hand in such
array when you go up against him!"

Huon laughed right joyfully at her words and

said to Godrun:

"You see, friend, this is our temper and it shall
be the undoing of so proud and willful a lord as
this Duke Raoul. I have heard at all times good
report of your Emperor who men bespeak as a just
and generous lord. Now I shall ride to him and
ask for his word upon the matter."

Thus it was decided and, with Godrun and oth-
ers who were of his following, Huon set forth for
the city of Mayence.

108

HI. HOW HUON SETTLED HIS
QUARREL WITH RAOUL, TRUSTING IN
THE EMPEROR'S JUSTICE

But while they yet were some distance from May-
ence, Huon summoned to him his principal knights
and made plain to them his desire—that he ride
alone to the court of the Emperor, since this quar-
rel with Duke Raoul was his only and not to be
pursued by other men. All raised their voices and
spoke against him in this matter, but he would
not be gainsaid and, in the end, it went as he
willed and he rode alone into the stronghold of the
enemy.

Now the Emperor had decreed feasting for all
comers and welcomed to his own table those
knights who were minded to try their fortune at
the jousting. When Huon came into the city, all
clad in mail, his helm on his head, lance in hand,
he rode straight into the hall of the Emperor
where all the court sat in merriment and good

109

cheer over their meat. And all there were greatly
amazed to see a knight in such warlike guise ride
in amongst them. So that the Emperor called thus
to him with his own voice:

"Ha, sir knight, and what manner of man be
you to ride so boldly and in such rude, warlike
dress into this company? Know you not that I be
Emperor of all this land and to me men do full

courtesy?"

At the right hand of the Emperor sat the Duke
Raoul. No armor was on him, no helm hid his
comely face. But he was clad in a seemly robe of
rich crimson with much gold thread worked into
it in a cunning manner, showing a hunt with
hounds and hart in full cry. Though his heart was
foul yet his appearance was fair, and of all the
lords there assembled at that time he was the best
to look upon—saving only Huon.

But when the Duke of Bordeaux did gaze upon
the face of his enemy and thought of all which had
been reported to him by Godrun concerning Raoul,
he did believe the Emperor's nephew like unto a
demon out of Hell. And his rage arose in his throat
until it was like to choke him, so that he needs
must turn aside his eyes from Raoul lest he be
moved by his hate to strike him down where he
sat in such ease and splendor.

So Huon came before the Emperor and made
answer to him clearly.

"Lord Emperor, I am liege man to Charlemagne
of France and have come hither to try my fortune
in the tournament which your heralds have pro-
claimed throughout Christendom. But in this hour
I stand here before you for another cause, also, for

I would ask of you justice—since you are renowned
for your fair dealing with all men."

And the Emperor smiled upon Huon and he put
forth his hand to urge silence upon all those who
sat there.

"Never hath any man, gentle or common, come
crying to me for justice that I did not make full
answer according to the wits and heart the good
God granted to me at my birthing. Speak on,
stranger, what is your plaint?"

And Huon straightway told his story.

"This is how it has fared with me, Lord Em-
peror. Know you that I hold a fief of some small
wealth, which I am lord of by right of birth and
the might of my sword arm. And also, by the Grace
of the Lord Jesu, I rejoice in the love of a fair lady
whom I won to wife after many fell dangers and
much bitter suffering.

"When I was from home on affairs of my fief,
a lord of your following did come in disguise into
my keep for no other purpose than to look upon
my lady of whom he'had heard much report. When
he saw her he did purpose to take her for his own,
deeming me of little account and not to be held
in esteem. Yea, he even made sport of me before
his men, saying that he would easily slay me in
this tournament and take my wife and my fief for
his own.

"So do I ride to you in the guise of war, that I
may demand justice against this villain. Now do
I cast down my glove and face him sword to sword
and shield to shield that I may wrack upon his
body the punishment he deserves!"

But black now was the Emperor's face and hot
his voice as he made answer:




"Such a man is not worthy to be called in com-
bat, as if he were truly a belted knight of honor
and goodly life. Therefore, if it be true that he is
man of mine, I give you full leave to slay him
wherever you may chance upon him and in what-
ever degree he now abides!"

Upon hearing these words of the Emperor,
Huon slipped from the saddle of his horse, putting
aside the lance he had borne into the hall. And
he drew forth from its scabbard his sword. Taking
a quick step to the high table, he raised the visor
of his helm so that those there might look upon
his face. And then he cried out to Duke Raoul:

"Traitor, false and perjured knight! Look upon
that Huon of Bordeaux whom you did plot to send
to his death. Bordeaux and my Lady Claramonde
are not for you!"

Then raising his sword he did run it through
the body of Raoul, slaying him before he could rise
out of his seat. Whereupon all those who abode in
the hall gave forth cries of fear and anger. And
principal among these was the Emperor, who
called upon his guards to cut down this murderer.

But Huon turned then upon the Emperor,
crying:

"So this be your true practice, Lord Emperor?
That since it is a kinsman of yours who is the
offender, justice shall not be done. If your justice
turns so easily, I want none of it. This shall uphold
my case against yours!"

He leaped into the saddle and held aloft his
sword still all bedrabbled with the blood of Raoul.
Then he went up against those of the guard who
tried to stay him and he cut his way through them,
fighting as one of the great heroes of old. And

112

many men did he wound and slay before he won
free out of the city of Mayence.

By the Emperor's order all those knights who
rode under the banners of Alamayne got to horse
and pursued Huon across the plain. And with
them rode the Emperor himself, mounted on his
charger Amphage—mate to which there was none
in the whole world. So great was the rage of the
Emperor that he spurred out before his men and
so came close to Huon.

Huon, seeing this, stayed his flight a little and
waited upon the Emperor. And they came together
with such force that the Emperor was thrown from
the back of Amphage and his leg was broken in
twain. Then did Huon look upon his enemy with
pity in his heart, and he raised no sword against
him. Instead he left his tired horse and, mounted
upon Amphage, rode away. And the Emperor was
taken up by those who followed him.

But because Huon did pity his enemy and leave
him living on the field, much sorrow and bitter-
ness were to be his portion.

113

IV. HOW THE EMPEROR BROUGHT
WAR TO BORDEAUX AND THAT CITY
WAS REDUCED TO SORE STRAIT

Huon came into the encampment of those who had
followed him from Bordeaux and he straightway
set before them how ill his mission had fared. So(
they arrayed themselves for the battle which was
speedily brought upon them when the knights and
lords of Alamayne, hot with anger, came at a full
gallop. But the knights and men of Bordeaux were
no green youths entering into their first assay of
arms untried. And they were led by Huon and by
the crafty Gerames who had grown old in warfare.

So did those of Bordeaux fashion a wall of steel
which held fast against the enemies' charge. And
full many of the Emperor's men were struck from
their saddles to their death beneath the iron shod
hooves of their own chargers. Huon fought not like
one man but as twenty. From one end of the field

114

to the other his sword cleared him an open path
and naught was behind him but men newly dead.

Thus at last the Emperor, who had been watch-
ing from a litter the manner of this desperate af-
fray, began to bemoan the slaughter of his men,
for it was like to be that none of them might sur-
vive the field. At the same time Gerames spurred
to ride stirrup to stirrup with Huon and say:

"Lord Duke, we have made much grievous
slaughter among these proud men of Alamayne.
The Emperor himself has been laid low by your
own skill and courage. But after the way of bat-
tles, we have lost divers good knights and sturdy
bow and pike men, too. This be the land of Ala-
mayne and the Emperor can call to him fresh men.
But Bordeaux lies many leagues away and how
can we summon any to fill the gaps which death
has holed in our battle line?"

Huon, thinking upon this, believed that Ger-
ames spoke with his usual wisdom and he an-
swered:

"Let us send a herald unto the Emperor and ask
if he will make truce. Then shall we withdraw
into our own land where the advantage will be
ours. Send forth a herald of your choosing with
trumpeters, and have him seek out the leader of
the men of Alamayne thus—"

And so was it done. In spite of the Emperor's
great and abiding hate for Huon, he needs must
agreed to the truce, thinking to himself the while
that when his leg was healed and he could call up
fresh liege men he would pursue the Duke of Bor-
deaux even to the walls of his own city and that
he would rive that same city with fire and sword

115

and reduce it to naught in the eyes of all men. But
for that he must bide his time. So did he agree to
a six months' truce to hold betwixt them.

Thereafter the armies parted from each other,
both licking their wounds—even as a lion and a
tiger evenly matched might agree to fight no
more, but retreat into their private dens to hoard
their strength against another meeting.

Huon came back to Bordeaux with the greatest
speed possible and he related to the Lady Clara-
monde how he had served Duke Raoul and what
had come from his vengeance. The Lady Clara-
monde, greatly fearing of the future/said unto her
lord:

"Husband, this Emperor ruleth all the reaches
of Alamayne which, it has been said, is even
greater than France. He can call to his banner a
hundred knights for every man who owes you field
service. Mayhap he can crack Bordeaux like a nut
between his two fingers. Emperor Charlemagne
is lately dead and in his stead ruleth the child*
Louis. He hates you for the sake of his dead
brother whom you slew by chance, and he will not
come hither to aid you with as much as one arrow!"

"True," Huon made her sober answer. "There-
fore we of Bordeaux must trust in the grace and
goodness of Our Lord Jesu and do the best that
we can against the coming of a dark future."

"France may not aid us but there is help beyond
our borders if we will seek it, my lord. In Tunis
is my brother, now the Dey and overlord, and he
has a thousand times a thousand men to rally to
his battle cry. Think not that he is an unbeliever,
for long since did he accept Our Lord Jesu for his
own and is a Christian man. In our childhood

116

there was strong love between us twain and I do
not think that I am yet wholly forgotten by him.
Do you then take ship, husband, and get you over-
seas to Tunis. There call upon my brother and
return with the army he will freely give into your
service. So you can meet the Emperor with an
equal force!"

But Huon frowned and made dissenting answer:

"Wife, if I slip away now from Bordeaux and
sail overseas to secure this aid you speak of, I shall
then be deserting those who trust in me, and they
may freely name me coward and Yalse knight.
Much may chance on such a voyage and I may not
return therefrom, leaving my city to a black fate.
Nay, here I must stay and share what may come."

So did he answer all the pleas of Claramonde.
And her fear of the future did press upon her heart
as if a rock had settled therein.

All the defenses of Bordeaux were made stronger,
and food and drink were brought into the city, the
carts moving through all gates from sunrise to
sunset. Out in the land Gerames had put many
watchers and swift messengers to spy upon the
coming of the men of Alamayne and all within the
city worked with a will to be ready.

At last came the word that the banners of Ala-
mayne were to be seen on the borders of the duchy
and that the forces of the Emperor were laying
waste—burning and slaying as they came. Then
did the men of Huon's following withdraw within
the stout walls of the city. A store of arrows and
crossbow bolts were brought up, swords and lances
were made ready and they waited.




Soon enough the forces of Alamayne came be-
fore the city and set up a camp of many tents.

117

That night their campfires made a blazing ring
without end, encircling the walls of Bordeaux.

Then did Huon say to Gerames:

"Look you how this Emperor takes his ease be-
fore my walls, setting out his meat and drink to
consume at leisure because he thinks us en-
trapped, to be taken and slain whene'er he wishes.
Let us issue forth and show him what manner of
prey he seeks!"

So did a picked force come silently out of the
city by a postern gate and they rode as swift as
the wind, silent as the clouds of the night, down
upon the enemy camp. There'they wrought such
damage as the Alamayne force did think might
be done by demons. Full many knights died that
hour, and the Emperor was fain to cry aloud with
rage and pain.

But Huon's force withdrew into the city again,
with joy and ease of heart because of the grievous
blow that they had successfully dealt. And the
Duke said to his men:

"Where is Sir Gerames? I do not hear his voice
raised in our rejoicing."

Then a knight, wounded almost unto death,
rode forward crying:

"Alas, Lord Duke, in that last charge Sir Ger-
ames was swept from his horse and if he be not
dead, then he is surely in the hands of the enemy!"

V. HOW GERAMES WAS BROUGHT
OUT OF MORTAL DANGER AND HUON
WAS FORCED TO SEEK AID

Gerames, bleeding from many wounds and help-
less, was brought before the Emperor, who was
overjoyed at the capture of a lord so high in the
council of the enemy. And in high good humor he
called forth to the men of his host:

"Here have we one of these stout villains who
oppose us. Now, to the man who brings me Huon
also so humbled, will I give both this proud city
of Bordeaux and the Lady Claramonde herself."

But Gerames faced him right proudly and with
, head held high, saying in return:

"Bold words, my Lord Emperor, bold words. Not
yet have you or any man of yours won within the
gates of Bordeaux save that he went so as a pris-
oner of ours. And Duke Huon shall hold those
same gates fast against all comers as long as it

be needful. No knight in all the land ofAlamayne
can take this city or humble its lord!"

And at this speech from a captive, standing
chained and unarmed, the Emperor was wroth in-
deed, and he turned to his marshal, Sir Otho, or-
dering him in this wise:

"Take forth this graybearded fool and any we
have captured with him, build high a gallows nigh
unto the city wall. And when that be finished—
hang them all!"

Sir Otho stirred not from his place, but rather
cautioned his liege lord with these words:

"Sire, if we do your will in this matter then
shall those of Bordeaux be moved to act likewise
against men of ours who lie captive behind their
walls. Pray you, by the grace of Our Lord Jesu,
think again before you order this thing."

But the Emperor turned upon him a face so
black with wrath that he needs must obey. And
sorrowfully he led forth Gerames and divers other
men of Bordeaux who had been taken in the battle.

By the walls of Bordeaux, hardly a bowshot
length beyond the main gate, the men of Ala-
mayne erected a wide gallows. And those within
the city came to stand upon the battlements and
look down to see what was being done. Huon beat
his fists upon the harsh stone and called forth:

"Shall we allow our brothers-in-arms to be so
served? Let all who will helm and horse and follow
me. For if we allow this to be done to them then
shall never again our honor be bright in the sight
of men!"

And all those who could sit horse or draw a bow
made ready to issue out in rescue.

Once again Sir Otho had gone in to the Emperor

120

and there, holding himself humbly, made again
a plea for mercy.

"Sire, truly has this Duke Huon hurt your heart
when he slew before your eyes the Duke Raoul
whom you loved right well. But let him pay for
this in Christian wise. Let him voyage to the Holy
Land and there do proper penance. Do you send
now a herald unto the city and—"

But no more words left his lips for the Emperor
gave a roar of rage—like unto the roar of a
wounded boar—and Sir Otho was forced away by
his friends lest the Emperor order him hanged
also. Sadly the marshal returned to the foot of the
gallows. But there he set no guard and he delayed
the hanging as long as he might, hoping that the
Emperor might yet relent his harshness.

There came a brazen clang as down fell the
drawbridge of Bordeaux and out of that city came
a desperate band of fighting men. Down upon the
gallows they whirled and there they cut free the
prisoners, while another force spurred ahead to
use sword and lance upon the men of Alamayne.
Before the Emperor could order his army, they
were back again into the city—only with them
they had swept Sir Otho and a hundred more of
the enemy.

. These Huon would have used even as the Em-
peror had ordered done to the men of Bordeaux—
hanging them together from the battlements. But
Gerames spoke for them, telling all that Sir Otho
had done to make peace. So Huon pardoned the
prisoners in the name of his beloved friend.

Now that very night there was born to Duke
Huon and the Lady Claramonde a daughter. And
about her cradle in the keep there appeared divers

121

of the ladies ofElfland, each bringing to the child
her blessing and the promise that she would wear
a crown and rule as a powerful and well-beloved
queen. But the chief of these ladies looked most
sorrowfully upon Huon and his duchess and she
spoke through falling tears:

"Lord Duke and Lady Duchess, sore are our
hearts in Elfland and we grieve for you and for
this fair Clarette, born your daughter. By the Law
of Fairies King Oberon cannot succor you in this
distress since he had proclaimed that after him
you shall reign our king and queen and to that
estate you must now win by your own strength
and endeavor. He bids me tell you that you shall
not again look upon his face until that distant
hour when you twain will meet for the last time.
So wait no longer to seek for aid—if you have any
to seek!"

When the Elf ladies had gone Huon called to
him his herald, Herbourny, and instructed him in
this wise:

"Raise you the flag of truce and ride into the
camp of the Alamayne men. There seek out the
Emperor and say to him that much blood has been
spent by both of us in this quarrel. But if he will
declare an end to warfare, then shall I make sub-
mission unto him as a vassal to his rightful lord,
holding Bordeaux by his permission—since the
King of France has come not to my aid. And like-
wise I shall go to the Sepulcher of Our Lord Jesu
in the Holy Land to pray for the good of all of us.
But if the Emperor says nay to this, then shall we
fight on until the last stone be tumbled from our
walls!"

So did Herbourny bear the message given him

122

by Huon, and the lords of Alamayne would have
been content with the terms the Duke proposed.
But the Emperor, mad with hate, would have none
of it and drove the herald from him with threats.

Huon then summoned to him all the principal
men of Bordeaux. And when they were assembled
within the hall of the keep, he told them of the
failure of his attempt to make terms. Then he
added:

"Men of Bordeaux, we have but little meat or
drink left within our walls. In each sally good
knights and men go to their deaths so in time
there will be none of us left to hold sword against
the enemy. Louis of France will send us no aid.

"But Salybrant, brother to my lady, rules as
Dey in Tunis. He is a Christian man and may aid
us for the love he bears the Duchess. Thus our
only hope remains that I go forth secretly from
this city and seek him out to beg help. Be this
your will also?"

And all assembled there, knowing how dark
was the future, agreed that he must do this thing.
So he set Gerames in his place as leader of the
men of Bordeaux. Then having taken leave of his
lady and their daughter he slipped away in the
night with only a few followers.

123

VI. HOW IT FARED WITH THOSE WHO
HELD BORDEAUX AGASNST THE
WRATH OF THE EMPEROR

Many and valorous were the deeds of the men of
Bordeaux holding their city against the enemy.
But in every charge from out its gates, and in
every fight upon the walls, men fell under the bite
of the sword or by the swift shaft of the arrow.
And none arose from out of the dust to take their
places. So that fewer and fewer were able to an-
swer the call to arms of the battle trumpets.

And Gerames, seeing every hour his lines grow
thinner, his men fall to return no more, sorrowed
in his heart. But with all he kept a brisk tongue
and a bright face for the Lady Claramonde. While
she, donning heavy mail over her tender flesh, did
walk the walls and draw a bow of her own, sending
full many straightly aimed arrows into the Ala-
mayne camp.

But at length came a dark day when the mayor

124

of the city waited upon the Duchess to say unto
her:

"Liege lady, within this city are many stout
hearts and strong arms to your service. But food
and drink are needed by all men. Wide now stands
the granary door and naught lies within the bins
there but the dust of the wheat which once filled
them. We have not tasted meat this fortnight past
and ill seems the future."

Then up spake Gerames in answer:

"True, fighting men must eat and we cannot
hold the walls save when we have the proper
strength to do so. In the fields beyond the river
there graze cattle and sheep brought hither by our
enemy for his service. This night let us issue forth
and sweeps them up!"

So was it decided in a council of war and Ger-
ames, with the best of the fighters still living,
came secretly out into the fields. But the Em-
peror's man on watch there was no dullard and
he gave the alarm so swiftly that Gerames' men
were struck while yet they were gathering the
cattle together. And in the dark was fought a grim
battle.

Ill indeed was the fortune of the men of Bor-
deaux. Some were swept into the river where,
weighted down by their mail, they went to death
in the waters, none hearing their cries for help.
And others fell under the sword and lance or, lying
wounded in the press, were trampled by the
horses. Thus died the last of the strong fighting
men of Bordeaux.

And among them was Gerames, who had been
slave to the Saracens, hermit in the desert lands,
and a good friend to Huon all his days. Bravely

125

he died as became a belted knight, slain by hon-
orable wounds as a warrior of fame. And with him
died the hope and deliverance of the Lady Clar-
amonde and her daughter.

Bernard, who had been squire to Gerames, won
free after the fall of his master and fought his way
by sheer strength of his body to the gates of the
city. There he did spur to the keep where, all blood
and dust from the field, he ran through the halls
seeking out the duchess.

The Lady Claramonde, seeing him in such sore
straits, did guess somewhat of his dire news before
he gave it tongue.

But when he cried: "On the field lies even now
my master, the noble Gerames—" she gave such
a scream as might one faced by doom, and then
she stood statue still until those about her thought
her mind gone from reason of the blow. But in
time she turned to them and, when she spoke, it
was evenly and with a calm voice.

"With Gerames, who was our fortress and our
shield, reft from us, we cannot hope to prevail
against the Emperor who can call to his service
full half of Europe, while we have not enough left
to man the walls. Too late v/ill my lord return
with the help he has gone to seek. But be sure,
friends, that when again he rides in France it will
be to-avenge this hour and us. Now I will go up
into the gate and from the window there I shall
hail this Emperor and see what terms he will
grant us in his triumph. But first, Bernard, I
would speak with you."

She took the squire into the fair part of the hall
where they were alone and there she did give him
certain orders, namely that he was to go to the

126

stable and there saddle with his own hands the
horse Amphage which Huon had won from the
Emperor in battle. Then she would send to him
secretly one of her maidens with the child Clar-
ette. And the baby he was to bear to Cluny and
there give her into the safe keeping of the Abbot,
who was uncle to Huon and his good friend.

"For," said the Lady Claramonde, "the Emperor
may take Bordeaux by reason of our weakness and
me he may make prisoner. But this child who be
heir to Huon shall be saved from his wrath."

And Bernard swore by the Cross that he would
guard the child even to his heart's blood and bear
her safely to the Abbey of Cluny. Then he made
haste to the stable and had forth Amphage, the
horse being fresh and eager for the road. Hardly
had he made secure the saddle upon the charger's
back than down came the maid, slipping through
the shadows bearing in her arms—close wrapped
in a dark cloak—the little Clarette. And with the
baby before him the squire made his way out of
Bordeaux by a little known way and reached the
fields beyond the town. Once free he put spurs to
Amphage and rode at a gallop into the night to-
ward Cluny.

When the maid reported to the Lady Clara-
monde that her daughter was in Bernard's keep-
ing and that the squire had set forth, the Duchess
went up into the gate and caused torches to be set
up there so that those without the gate might see
her standing so. And then she ordered her trum-
peter to sound parley.

This being reported to the Emperor, he came
himself on horseback, and, looking up at the lady
standing framed by torchlight, he thought her

127

very young and fair and he knew pity for her. But
remembering that she was wife to Huon he hard-
ened his heart and waited in silence to hear what
she had to say.

"Lord Emperor"—loud and clear, without tears
or breaking, sounded the voice of the Lady Clar-
amonde—"defenseless against your might lies
this city of Bordeaux at this hour, since you have
broken our strength at last and put to lance and
sword our men. But you and those who follow you
be Christian men and as Christians I ask that you
deal with us mercifully as Our Lord Jesu has
taught."

"Lady," replied the Emperor, "be assured that
this city shall not be put to sack if you now sur-
render yourselves to me. And I promise to deal
with you and yours after no barbaric manner."

With that half promise she needs must be con-
tent. But in her heart she was glad that she had
sent forth her daughter while there was yet time.

So was Bordeaux surrendered and the Emperor
did not sack it but set over it his own governor.
And those who had been men of Huon and were
still living he took with him to Mayence. There
were they set in prison and the Lady Claramonde
was placed in a stout tower where she did not even
see the face of her keeper. And her heart was nigh
to breaking when she thought upon her evil
plight, her only hope lying in the swift return of
Huon.

128

Vll. OFHUON'S VOYAGE THROUGH
STORMY SEAS AND HIS COMING TO
THE CASTLE ADAMANT

Huon and those with him, having stolen away
through the forces of the enemy, came at length
to a port of the sea. And there the Dute made
inquiries concerning a ship to take him and his
companions unto Tunis. But it was the season of
wild storms in the outer ocean, and few captains
desired to risk their craft to the tearing winds and
raging waters. But, after many days, Huon found
a sailing master willing to try his fortune, and so
they set sail.

Just beyond the protection of the harbor their
vessel was caught up by the wind and fled helpless
before a storm through seas which were moun-
tains of foam and water. No man amongst them,
no matter what his knowledge, could control their
flight, and they knew not whither they sailed.
Within the ship they were flung hither and thither

129

so that all were sore bruised and Huon did strain
his sword arm so that he could not raise it from
his side. Thus did they exist for several days,
and in all that time they sighted not the sun nor
knew if it were day or night which encompassed
them.

Then there appeared across the sky before them
a band of sullen fire and there was a sound to be
heard even above the fury of the wind, a sound
like unto the crackling of flames. The master of
the ship, weak and trembling so that he could
hardly stand upon his two feet, came to Huon and
said:

"My Lord Duke, now we poor sinners be indeed
undone and utterly lost, for the storm has driven
us over the edge of the world and before us now
lie the iron gates of Hell—even as legend has re-
ported it!"

Huon looked upon that band of flames and lis-
tened to that dolorous moaning which seemed to
issue therefrom, and he, too, knew fear. But he
stood straight and faced to it, saying:

"We be but mortal men and so full of sin. But
on this sailing we come with clean hearts and the
wish to aid those weaker than ourselves. So by the
promises made us by Lord Jesu, I say to you now—
fear not. For Hell shall not engulf us, nor swallow
us this day!"

And he spoke the truth, for though the current
of the waters bore them close to those iron gates
which bar that foul place and they heard the wail-
ing of the lost within, yet did they escape Hell .and
were carried on. At length the flames faded from
the sky and before them they saw a point of honest
sunlight piercing through the gloom.

130

This beam struck full upon a rocky mountain
rising out of the sea, a mountain as black as the
stormy night which lay behind them. But on its
crown was a castle of purest white so that Huon
and all those within the ship took heart with look-
ing upon it, for it must be the keep of some great
lord who would give them rest and shelter.

Straight toward the mountain of rock drove the
vessel, and now the master again looked wan and
afraid as he cried aloud:

"Alas! We are the most unfortunate of men! This
be the castle and the rock of Adamant, which is
truly a trap to catch honest sailors. Know you that
there is that in this rock which draws to it all of
iron, even to the nails in the ship, and once it
holds it never lets go again. They who come to
Adamant go not forth from there again!"

From their ship they could now see about the
foot of the mountain many other vessels, some old
and rotted with time until they were crumbling
into the water they rested upon. And into the
heart of this dead fleet was drawn their own ship,
pounding to bits many of the wrecks about it.

But as the day faded it appeared to Huon that
lights shone out in the windows of the castle above
and he wished to climb the rock and seek help,
since the store of food and water they had on board
was but a small one. But still was his arm useless
to him, so that he himself could not attempt such
a feat.

Then did one of his men, Sir Arnold, who came
from mountain country and had ofttimes climbed
among rocks for sport, stand out and say that he
would assay the climb. And he put aside his mail
and all weapons but his belt knife. They wished

131

him well as he began to scramble across the slimy
rock near the sea where the spray dashed high.

The way to the castle was not too difficult and
he came at length to the main gate. There he
paused and hailed those who might be within. But
no one answered him save the rising wind, nor
could he see any sentry on the battlements or hear
anything move within.

Since the gate stood ajar he ventured inside.
But there was no man or woman to be seen in all
the courtyard. It was like a house of the long since
dead. As he lingered there, shivering a little with
cold and loneliness, he heard at last a sound, but
not that of honest footsteps. And he turned to see
gliding across the pavement a loathly serpent.
Taller than the wall behind, it reared its fanged
head and from its open jaws dripped green venom
to spatter on the stones.

Sir Arnold, having naught but his belt knife to
defend himself, fled for his life, dodging the ser-
pent and winning down the rock again to the ship.
There he told what he had seen, saying that death,
fanged and scaled, crawled through those halls
above and no mortal man might go safely there.

So did those on the ship know despair, for their
food grew less with each passing day and men
dropped in their weakness and could not keep
their feet. But a second ship drove in among the
pack of wrecks and this was manned by pirates.
Huon called upon his men to arm and fight and
they did take the pirate ship and put those within
to the sword. For a while thereafter they had the
provisions found there to stay them and they knew
hope again.

But in no way could they free their vessel from

232

the grip of Adamant and as the weeks passed one
by one they sickened and died, some from star-
vation, some from illness bred by the rotten ships
about them, and some from lack of hope. Only
Huon would not allow his heart to faint for he
kept ever before him the thought of Bordeaux and
those who lay behind its walls trusting him. And
he swore that he would do all in the power of
mortal man in their behalf.

Then came the morning when he was the only
living man to rise from his couch, all alone on the
ship. And nowhere was there a mouthful of bread
or water to assuage his hunger and thirst. He
knew that death was very nigh to him. But
he determined that if that be so it would be a
death of his own choosing. And, though his
body was weak so that he had to rest many times,
he donned his mail and helm and belted on his
sword.

Then he turned to the rock and called out in a
loud and ringing voice

"Monster or demon, I, Huon of Bordeaux, do
come now and I bring your death upon the point
of my steel."

Then he began to ascend the rock, having to go
slowly because of his great weakness and the pain
which still made his sword arm heavy. But after
a time he came out upon the top of the mountain
and saw before him the gates of the castle. The
sun touched to golden fire certain words graven
on these gates which Huon read, this being the
warning of Adamant.

"Let him who enters herein beware, for unless
he be the worthiest of mortal knights with a body
like unto steel, this venture shall prove his

133




last. But if his courage fails not—then let him
enter."

And Huon, drawing his sword, entered into the
castle of Adamant.

134

Vin. OF THE CASTLE ADAMANT AND
ITS LOATHLY GUARDIAN

In the courtyard there was nothing living to be
seen—not even a bird—and a deep silence hung
over the place, which Huon thought must be like
unto the silence which abides within a tomb. In
him his heart grew chill and he knew the coldness
of true fear.

Then out of the silence there came a sound, a
strange slithering noise which was not made, he
knew, by mortal man. And he saw, coming forth
from the inner hall, the loathly serpent which Sir
Arnold had spoken of.

Many spans high swung its head and its blazing
eyes were like unto flaming lamps. In its mouth
its tongue flickered back and forth like the lash
of a slaver's whip and its fangs dripped green and
acid venom. The^e fangs were as long as a stout
man's arm and there seemed to be no end to the
scaled body of the creature.

135

When it saw Huon it hissed and screamed and
coiled across the pavement. Huon held his shield
before him and stood ready with his sword. But
the monster lunged a blow with its blunt head
and, catching the edge of the shield with one of
its fangs, tore the iron apart as if it were but rotted
wood.

Huon's sword struck straight and true upon its.
body but the scales there were as the stoutest ar-
mor and the steel blade slipped down without cut-
ting through them.

Again the serpent drew back its head for a fatal
stroke. And now Huon flung from him the riven
shield and useless sword, knowing the darkness
of despair. Then he chanced to sight a lance lean-
ing against the inner gate, a lance shining and
barbed and longer than any he had ever seen be-
fore. This he seized upon before the serpent struck.

Holding it fast in his two hands he braced the
butt on the stones of.the courtyard pavement,
steadying it with all the strength in his body. And
when the serpent's head loomed above him he
moved so that the lance pierced up into its mouth
and through that into its brain. Thus did it die
with many writhings and coilings of its loathsome
body.

Faint and weak Huon stumbled on into the hall
of the castle and there did he halt amazed at what
he saw. For not even the court of the Emperor
could boast such richness.

There were five and twenty great pillars and
some of these were of a marble as purely white as
the walls of Heaven, and some of a marble as dark
as night, and some of jasper and some of sardonyx.
And about the walls and entwined upon these pil-

136

lars was a vine of soft gold, wrought with mar-
velous subtlety so that it seemed a living thing.
And hanging from this vine were clusters of
grapes, but they were formed of amethyst and em-
eralds and rubies, more than might be contained
in the ransom of a hundred kings. Light shone
from these stones, making bright all that long
hall.

The flooring whereon he trod was a mosaic pat-
terned with the deeds of heroes, but heroes he
knew not. And beyond this hall were divers other
chambers all rich and of a surpassing beauty, with
baths of gleaming crystal, containing likewise cof-
fers and chests full of all manner of clothing such
as the greatest lords of the earth might be proud
to wear.

Then did Huon put off his armor and lave his
body in a cooling bath. And he donned a fine robe
of soft blue and set about his loins a belt of sap-
phire and gold. Thus appareled, he further ex-
plored the castle and found at last a walled garden
wherein grew ripe fruit. And on this did he break
his fast, though still he longed for meat and bread.

That night he slept in an ivory bed, full weary
from all which had happened to him. But in the
morning he awoke refreshed. And having eaten
again of the fruit, he wandered anew through
Adamant. So did he learn that there was no road
out of this wondrous castle save back down the
rock to the dead ships. And he feared that he must
spend his days there a prisoner for life.

Despairing, he sank down upon a thronelike
seat fashioned of beaten gold which stood in a
little room all to itself. And casting his eyes to the

137

floor because of his sorrow, he chanced to see cer-
tain words set there in the paving.

"0, man of courage," he read, "if you be also
free of sin, take then the key which lies to your
hand and use it here."

And below these words he saw a keyhole of gold,
while on the arm of the throne there was chained
a key. Kneeling he set this into the lock and
turned. There came the sound of stones moving
in their beds and that portion of the pavement on
which lay the writing tilted up, showing beneath
it a stair. Down these steps went Huon, for he
deemed that his case could be no worse than now
it was.

Below he found a long vaulted hallway wherein
was set an oven of stone. And two men served this
oven, bringing out fair loaves of bread and setting
dough in their place. They worked in silence, nor
did they make an answer when Huon asked them
whence they came or who they were. Angered at
last he set himself in the path of one and seized
tight upon the sleeve of his tunic.

Then the man turned upon him, frowning, and
said:

"Rash mortal, why do you so disturb my la-
bors?" And he tried to pull free his sleeve from
Huon's grip. But the Duke would not let him go.

"In the Name of Our Lord Jesu and those who
dwell in Heaven, I beg you give me to eat of your
bread, for I have been fasting for these many
days—"

The servingman still frowned, but he answered
quickly:

"If you be Christian man and without sin, then
you may eat freely of our viands. Go you to the

138

table yonder and break your fast as you will. But
know you—our food be death to those who eat
treacherously of it. This is a fairy castle and we
are bound here to serve in silence for a thousand
years. Nor shall we speak to you again!"

Then he twitched his sleeve from out Huen's
fingers and went back to his work. Nor would he
answer any question Huon asked of him there-
after.

So Huon went to the table at the far side of the
room and there he discovered all manner of meat
and drink laid out upon it. And he feasted as he
had not since he left Bordeaux. Thus passed many
days in the Castle of Adamant. And every day
Huon tried to find a way out of that place, but
there was none.

Then one night there came a storm which ap-
peared like to tear the castle from its root on the
rock. And when he went forth in the morning and
looked down upon the place of ships he saw that
many had been pounded into bits against the rock
by the waves.

But even as he watched a new vessel appeared
on the edge of the sea and was borne toward Ad-
amant by that fatal enchantment which made the
mountain a trap. Huon sorrowed to see the coming
of more companions in misfortune. But he climbed
down the mountain to lend aid to any who might
win to shore.

139

IX. OF THE COMING OF THE GRIFFIN
AND HUON'S ESCAPE FROM ADAMANT

Those upon the ship in the bay gave thanks upon
reaching land in safety. Now half of them were
Saracen and half Christian men who had been
taken up by the mariners from a barren rock after
a storm had shattered their vessel. When they saw
Huon all cried out to him for food, being sore dis-
tressed, for they had been driven before the winds
for many days and what provisions they had car-
ried were all gone.

So did Huon bring to them the bread and meat
which were provided by the fairy men within the
castle. But he cautioned them that only those who
were Christian and of good heart could eat thereof
without hurt. So did the Christians among the
company take up the food and eat it and feel no
ill. But the captain of the Saracens said unto
Huon:

"Faint are we from hunger and nigh unto death.

140

Yet a man who will betray his faith for meat in
his belly is a false coward. Therefore we shall not
eat."

But not all of his men were of the same mind
•and some gave over their belief and swore that
they were Christian for the sake of food. But when
they took into their mouths the bread from the
castle it was if they chewed upon a strong poison,
and their hearts failed them and they died. Look-
ing upon^heir bodies the Saracen captain laughed
bitterly and spoke his thoughts aloud.

"The truth was not in them and so they died.
The truth is in us but we shall also die, since we
will not turn our coats for bread."

But Huon saluted him as one brave man to an-
other, being true to himself and his belief. And
the Duke climbed again the mountain and gath-
ered the fruit of the walled garden. This he
brought unto the Saracens so that they praised
him much for the mercy and pity he had shown
unto them.

Christians and Saracens together now entered
Adamant with Huon and made free with all its
treasures, abiding with good content within its
walls. But Huon was still sore of mind and heart
and wished to win free of that place—though he
could see no manner of doing so.

Now it chanced that he came out upon the wall
of the castle in the early morning. And so did he
see a dark shadow which flashed across the sky,
as there flew from the east a mighty griffin. So
huge was this monster that its body darkened the
rising sun and its wings spanned the walls of Ad-
amant.

While Huon watched, the griffin dropped on

141

closed wings to the splintered wreckage of the
ships below and there it did choose one of the bod-
ies of those Saracens who had died of their greed.
In its talons it bore away the dead man, flying
steadily off with its prey.

And seeing this Huon thought him of a plan,
and he did determine to watch the following morn-
ing to see if the griffin would return or if its com-
ing was but a chance happening. So he arose with
the dawn on the next day and went up on the
battlements. Nor was he disappointed, for the grif-
fin returned again and bore away one of the bod-
ies.

Then Huon went down into the castle and
brought forth his mail and his sword. Only shield
he had none for the serpent had rent it apart with
its fangs. And having made all ready, he told those
who were in Adamant what he had chosen to do.
All cried out against his plan, saying that his folly
would only bring him to a horrible death, but he
answered them firmly in this wise:

"There is no way out of Adamant for mortal
man save this. And in Adamant I cannot bide
happily nor at peace when I know that Bordeaux
and all it contains, which is dearer to me than my
life, lies in danger. So shall I attempt this way of
escape by the aid of the griffin."

In the middle hour of the night, while it was
still dark, he put on his mail and girt on his sword.
So accoutered he climbed down the mountain to
the wreckage and sought out the deck of the ship
where lay the dead Saracens. And there he lay
down among the dead and waited for the dawn.

With the light in the east came the griffin, its
wings making thunder in the air. Huon lay un-

142

moving, faint with hope. Down swooped the griffin
and its claws fastened upon the Duke. But by rea-
son of his mail they did not pierce his body. Up
was he borne so fast that the wind rushed about
him and he was fain to close his eyes upon a reel-
ing heaven and earth.

The griffin flew steadily across the desert and
cliffs surrounding Adamant until it came to a
great rock standing like a pillar. On the crest of
this was the nest where cried five offspring of the
monster, their iron beaks gaping for the prey the
mother bore. And into the midst of these did the
parent griffin toss Huon.

Again his mail saved him from cruel death, for
sharp as were the beaks and claws of the young
griffins, they could not pierce to any vital spot of
his body. And though they drew blood from his
limbs he was not torn to pieces as they wished.

Escaping from their clutch, Huon drew his
sword and did battle with the young griffins, strik-
ing off the head of one, thrusting another through
the heart, and at length slaying them all. But as
he slew the last the parent monster returned and,
seeing what had chanced with her fledglings, she
screamed aloud her rage and struck down at Huon
so that her beak cut deeply into his shoulder and
he was like to be overborne and killed by the sav-
ageness of her attack.

Despairingly he thrust upward with his sword,
and by good fortune cut through one of the griffin's
legs, crippling the monster. Seeing that he had so
gained the advantage, he aimed a second and third
blow quickly and brought the creature to her
death.

Worn and weak from his wounds he rested

143

awhile and then, knowing that if he lingered there
in that desert place he would die for want of food
and water, he took up the great clawed foot of the
griffin and climbed down from the nest rock.

In the far distance he could see the green of
trees and he thought that there he might find
water to ease his parched throat and lave his
smarting wounds. He could travel but slowly for
reason of his pain and distress, so that he was
some hours crossing the hot, rocky land. And it
was with weak and wavering feet that he came
to a wide white gate and looked in upon a garden
of such fairness that for a space he thought that
he had truly died in that battle with the griffins
and that now he had come to Paradise.

144




X. HOW HUON DID FEAST UPON THE
APPLES OF PARADISE AND HEAR ILL
NEWS OF BORDEAUX

Cool and refreshing were the winds which blew
across that garden and sweet they were with the
scent of many flowers. So that when Huon came
in, his feet making no sound upon the smooth
greenness of the grass, he felt eased of his hurts
of mind and body. Fruit of gold and of red and of
purple hung heavy and ripe from trees and vines,
and a multitude of birds sang through the hours
of the day.

At length Huon came to a fountain of clear and
crystal water which plumed high into the air and
fell again into a basin curiously carved of pearl-
tinted stone. Huon, looking upon this, was minded
to rejoice in it and he freed himself from his wea-
rying mail and leather and splashed into that pure
flood.

Straightway, where the water laved his wounds,

145

they healed leaving no scars to seam his flesh.
And his weariness was gone so that he was as a
strong man arising after a most refreshing sleep.
Thus he lay for a time with his body within the
embrace of the water of that fountain until all was
well with him again.

Then, coming out of the flooded basin, he saw-
a tree set apart from the others of the grove, its
boughs bending to the ground by reason of the
fruit it bore in great quantity. And this fruit was
as golden as the sun and from it came a delightful
odor which drew him to it. He picked one and
found that he held an apple, perfect in all its
shape. Slowly he ate the fruit, and throughout his
body it seemed that the blood did run more swiftly
and his heart grow lighter, and he said aloud:

"How I would that my dear Claramonde stood
here with me now and that she held in her arms
our dear daughter, that we might be free of our
miseries in this garden of Paradise. For certainly
this be indeed that Paradise which sinful man so
willfully lost!"

And, having finished the apple, he reached
forth his hand to pluck a second.

But at that moment a bright column of light
appeared beside the tree and within it stood a
Being who seemed bodied in flame. So bright ands^
of such fire was this figure that Huon was fain to
cover his two eyes with his hands when he strove
to look upon it. And the Being spoke aloud in a
voice which was like the peal of silver-tongued
bells.

"Huon, Duke of Bordeaux!"

Then did Huon fall upon his knees, and he dared

not look upon the exceeding brightness of the
Being but answered in an humble voice:

"Aye, Lord?"

"Call me not 'lord,' Huon, for I am but the mes-
- senger of those who are greater than I. But list
well now to what I have to say unto you, for sad
and drear is the news I bear. Oh, Huon, stout must
you steel your heart against the hearing of it now.

"Know you that your city of Bordeaux has fallen
to your enemy, and a governor he has set over
your fief now does his will there—"

Hearing this, Huon did give an exceedingly bit-
ter cry and held out his hands beseechingly to the
messenger. But the bright one had no mercy upon
him yet. For when he asked:

"Claramonde and the little one, how fares it
with them?"

The messenger made answer: "Your daughter
was borne to Cluny by the Squire Bernard and
there bides safely with the Abbot, your uncle. But
your lady wife lies prisoner in the dungeon tower
ofMayence and piteous is her lot. Worse still shall
be her fate if you return not to succor her."

Now Huon stood upon his two feet and from his
eyes flashed the fire of dire anger and his right
hand crooked to the sword hilt.

"Go you forth, Huon of Bordeaux, to the edge
of this garden, and there you shall find a boat
floating upon a river. This will bear you hence so
that you may come again to save those who have
trusted in you. These only may you take with
you—"

The Being stretched out his hand, and at his
light touch three of the apples parted from their

stems and fell to the ground, rolling to Huon's
feet.

"These be the Apples of Eternal Youth and who-
soever eateth of them shall never again feel the
touch of age, but shall ever be young in the pride
of his best youth. Guard them well for they shall
serve you in the days to come."

So having spoken, the Being disappeared and
Huon stood alone with the Apples of Youth at his
feet. But now his heart was heavy with care and
sorrow for those he loved and he had no wish to
remain in that garden. Returning to the fountain
he put on again his mail and fastened his sword
belt about him and donned his helm. Then, with
the apples bound within a comer of his surcoat
and the griffin's limb within his hand, he crossed
the garden and came in time to a stream where-
upon rested a small boat.

Very curiously fashioned of ivory and ebony
was this boat, so that half of it was black and half
white. And within it were cushions of the finest
damask and silk from the East which even a king
might have been proud to wear upon his body.

Huon pushed the boat off from the shore and  ,
took the tiller, letting the current bear him where
it would, with the faith in his heart that he would .
again see Bordeaux.

All day the stream bore him swiftly along and
he broke his fast with the viands and drink he
found stored in boxes and flagons at his feet. But i
his mind was not at ease and, had he been able, i
he would have quickened that voyaging a hun-
dredfold.

Now the stream began to run between high rock ;

walls and in time these met far overhead to form |

148                                   \

a roof lost in the shadows. So Huon knew that he
had been carried underground. But it grew no
darker and he perceived that light arose out of the
water itself, and, after a while, having no fear, he
laid him down and slept.

In that hour he dreamed that he saw the Lady
Claramonde encompassed in gray stone and black
iron and that her fair face was white and wan and
that she stretched forth her hands and cried out
to him for aid. But he was held apart from her by
some force so that he could reply not.

Struggling, he awoke to find that beneath him
the boat rocked and that he was still underground,
but was moving not. And for the first time since
entering upon the stream he was afraid, afraid
that he might-be trapped there underground with
no hope of reaching light and day once more.

149

XI. HOW HUON VOYAGED
UNDERGROUND AND MET WITH THE
FAITHFUL BERNARD ONCE MORE

By the light which came from out of the water he
.saw that the prow of his boat had struck into a
bar of sand and gravel which thrust out into the
stream. And he leaped out upon this to see what
damage his vessel had suffered. In the gravel un-
der his feet lay divers stones which glowed and
blazed with fiery light and by the aid of these he
perceived that the boat had taken no harm from
the mishap, but was merely caught.

Wishing to have more light with him in this
place of lasting gloom he scooped up from the sand
these glowing gems and tossed them into the boat
where they made a glittering heap like unto a sea
lantern for light. Then, putting his shoulder to the
boat, he pushed it off into deep water once more
and jumped aboard as the current gripped it and
carried it on.

150




For another space of time he ate and slept
within the dark, but when he awoke for the second
time he found himself on an open bay of the sea
and saw in the distance the walls and towers and
wharves of a city. Then did he raise the sail which
lay within the boat and the wind bore him toward
that city where many flags and banners hung from
the battlements as if those within celebrated some
feast day.

Huon's boat came in to one of the wharves and
the people there marveled to see so small a ship
fashioned in so rich a manner. They called out to
Huon, asking who he was and from whence he
came. Thus did he learn in talk with these sailors
that this was the city of Tauris in the land of
Persia and that the Shah of the land abode now
within its walls, having proclaimed a feast for all
comers in honor of the Lord Jesu, the Shah having
but recently become a Christian.

Then did Huon give thanks aloud that he had
come to a Christian land and he decided to go
before the Shah and pray aid of him. But, before
he stood in the palace of the ruler of Persia, a
great and joyous happening was to befall him and
in this manner.

After the Squire Bernard had taken Clarette to
Cluny and left the child safe there with the Abbot
he bethought himself that he must now search out
his lord, the Duke Huon, wherever in the world
he might be, and bring him the dire tidings of
what had chanced in Bordeaux. So he took ship
and sailed to the eastern seas upon that quest.

First came he into the port of Jaffa where he
went among the Knights of the Cross and all man-
ner of traveling merchants and far-voyaging sail-

151

ors, asking for news of his lord. But no man there
had heard aught of Huon. From Jaffa, Bernard
next went to Jerusalem, but here was no news
either. So finally he made the journey to Cairo,
and long and perilous that journey was. There,
when he was asking through the merchants' quar-
ters for tidings of far-off lands, he met a Prankish
trader who replied to him thus:

"Friend, but lately I have heard that the Shah
of Persia has been newly converted to belief in our
faith. And for the honor of this faith he has pro-
claimed a feast to be held in his city of Tauris for
all comers. Merchants will go thither to trade
their wares, and surely in such a gathering you
will gain some news of your lord. I, myself, am
fitting out a caravan to travel to Tauris and, if
you wish, you may travel with me."

It seemed to Bernard that this was sage and
excellent council. Accordingly he joined with the
Prankish merchant across the desert into the
fields of Persia, coming in good time to the city
of Tauris. There he did go down to the seaside,
planning to ask news of the sailors new come to
that port. And there was hope in his heart, for
many strange ships lay at anchor there—so many
that their masts were as a forest of trees.

By chance he came to the very wharf where
Huon had tied up his boat, and there Bernard
heard of the coming of the foreign knight who had
appeared so strangely out of the sea. He went on
board the boat hoping that this stranger might
have some word of his master. And there he saw
Huon, but since the Duke was fully armed and
helmed he saw not his face nor knew that here
stood the very man he sought.

152

But Huon, knowing him, cried out a loud and
joyful greeting:

"Bernard of Bordeaux!"

And the Squire replied: "In truth here stands
Bernard once of that unhappy city. But you, sir,
I know not."

Straightway Huon put up the visor of his helm
so that his face was uncovered to the day and
Bernard, with a shout of thankfulness, fell down
upon his knees and gave glory to Our Lord for
bringing him so to his journey's end after such
weary searching. Then he made known unto the
Duke how ill had chanced matters since Huon had
left his city.

But Huon, having already heard this tale from
the Being in the garden, was not so stricken and
said unto his faithful squire:

"Good youth, we have stout arms and swords—
and with these, God willing, we shall put right
what is wrong. Now we must find gold to take us
back to France—"

But Bernard, while his lord had been speaking,
noted a strong light coming from out a coffer on
the deck before him. And now he asked what lay
within. Huon replied that it contained certain
stones he had found in the sands of the under-
ground river and he told to Bernard the full tale
of his wanderings.

The squire opened the coffer and, when he saw
what lay within, he was greatly astounded and
cried:

"Now here lies one of the greatest treasures that
is in our world. For these be the lost jewels of the
Elfmen and of them I have heard many a tale and
of them I have read many a time in the ancient

153

chronicles. It is said that these jewels do turn
night into day, and in addition they have other

virtues."

Out of the pile he took an amethyst of purple

as deep as the robes of state.

"Now the property of this is that he who wears
it cannot be poisoned, nay, not even if his cup
brims with venom, and he may also pass through
fire and water without any hurt.

"While the wearer of this"—and Bernard brought
forth a diamond which was like unto a star for
frozen brilliance—"cannot hunger or thirst, nor
does his countenance show the ravages of time,

man's eternal enemy.

"This emerald heals the wounds of him who
bears it and restores the sight of those blinded, if
it be laid upon their eyes. While this ruby con-
quers all ills of the body. With it upon you, you
need not fear even the Black Plague. And also it
will eat away the chains of any prisoner, if touched
to the iron, and last of all it can render its wearer

invisible at his will.

"Fifth and last be this carbuncle which will
light for you the darkest night, and if you bear it
into battle no foe man can touch you.

"These five be the lost stones of Elfland. And
a mighty treasure they are. Sell these if you will,
lord"—he pointed to the rest of the gems which
lay within the coffer still—"but keep the mystic

five, I pray you!"

"Fear not—that I shall!" Huon replied, joyful

for his great good fortune.

154

XII. HOW HUON GAINED THE GOOD
WILL OF THE SHAH AND MARCHED
TO FREE THE HOLY LAND

Huon and Bernard went into the city of Tauris
together and even into the inner court of the Shah
who was greatly astonished to see a Prankish
knight and squire so far from their native land.
But he received Huon and his follower with much
courtesy, urging that they join in the feasting.
And, when they had stayed their hunger, he had
Huon brought before him again and asked the
Duke why he had come so far from the realm of
France. Then Huon made full answer, telling all
that had befallen him during the year just past.

The Shah was moved by his story, so that he
said unto Huon:

"Lord Duke, many and grievous have been the
trials of heart and body which have been laid upon
you. Were I in my youth again, then would I go
out into the Holy Land in your company so that

155




we might walk together, where the feet of Our
Lord Jesu have trod, and fight righteously for
Him, putting to the sword all infidels and devil
worshipers who now hold that land. Thus having
so wrought in His Name and cleansed me of all
sin, I would sail across the seas with you and ride
out against this traitor emperor who has so de-
spitefully used you and yours."

Huon thanked the Shah for his kind words, say-
ing in reply:

"Lord, my heart rejoiceth much in what you
have said. For to free the Holy Land from the
impious hands of the infidel is indeed a good and
glorious task, and if I strive to do this as best I
can then surely will Our Lord Jesu further my
efforts to free again Bordeaux."

He then untied the corner of his surcoat and
took therefrom the Apples of Paradise which had
lain amongst its folds. And these glowed so it
seemed that the sun itself had been loosed there
in that room. One of the fruits he laid before the
Shah who took it up, amazed at its beauty and

fragrance.

With a smile Huon said, "Eat of this fruit, Lord
Shah, and ail that you have wished for shall be

possible—"

Then did the Shah bite deep into the fruit so

that the juice of it ran out upon his white beard
and age-trembling hands. But, lo, as he ate, his
back grew straight again, his beard and hair dark-
ened, and he was as a man in the full prime of his
youth. And he and all of his court cried aloud their
astonishment at this, demanding of Huon whence
came this marvelous fruit. So that Huon answered
them with the tale of the Apples of Paradise and"

156




the shining Being he had seen within the garden
of that place.

Also did he give unto the Shah certain jewels
he had taken from the underground river, but not
those which were of Elfland, and into his hands
he offered also the boat which had borne him to
Tauris. And all wondered at the richness of these
gifts.

But Bernard took the magic gems to a worker
in gold and jewels and had them set into a sword
belt which Huon wore about his body, nor did he
again part from that, since he trusted in the
strange properties of the stones.

Out over all his land did the Shah then send
the summons for his warriors to assemble. And in
not too long a time he had gathered an army such
as even the Emperor ofAlamayne could not boast
of leading. One half of this force he placed under
the command of Huon and he himself rode in the
van of the other half. So they marched into the
Holy Land.^

There they took the city of Angore after much
hard fighting and they put to flight a vast rabble
of Saracens and infidels. But from Angore they
needs must take ship upon the sea to reach their
next goal. And storm clouds gathered black over-
head so that these ships took refuge in the lee of
a mountain which arose from the sea.

Huon, looking closely upon the crown of the
mountain, thought that from its peak he might
well see the course of the storm and whether or
no it would keep them long pent within the bay.
So, despite the pleading of his men, he set out to
climb to that point.

Now the top of the mountain was flat and

157

square and naught was there save a huge tun, or
cask, of iron-bound wood. And by this tun lay an
iron mallet of no small size or weight. From the
tun issued forth all the while the voice of a man

weeping and wailing.

Huon advanced to the tun and rapped upon it
with his fist, calling out to know what manner of
prisoner lay within it. And a voice returned an-
swer, saying:

"If you be mortal man then you have come in
good time to save me. Know you that I am that
Cain who struck down his brother in hot anger.
And for that fault I have been sealed in this place
to bide until the end of measured time. But if a
mortal man takes up the mallet which lies beyond
and strikes in the head of this foul prison, then
may I issue forth and join with the demons of the
underworld which it is my fond wish to do. Nor
will you be able to depart again from this place

unless you so serve mel"

Huon went from the tun to the edge of the moun-
tain slope and looked down into the bay.
Thus he saw that the ships, and his men within
them, were being driven by the wind and storm
out into the sea so that he was left alone behind.
And he returned again to the tun and called out:

"Holla, Cain, you say that there be a way out
of this place. Tell me of it and I shall do as you
wish. The mallet is within my hand even now."
And he struck upon the rock with the mallet so

that the iron rang loud.

"Free me first," began Cain, but Huon laughed

aloud as he replied:

"Nay. For I cannot trust you in any part. Speak

first, or I shall serve myself as best I can."
158

And Gain, fearing that Huon could do even as
he said, answered quickly:

"On the sea below awaits a ship manned by a
demon. When I am free and go below I have only
to show to him the mallet which now you hold and
he will ferry me across the sea in safety to wher-
ever I wish."

When he had heard these words Huon tapped
lightly upon the tun and said:

"Many thanks to you, Cain. Now will I go to
prove the truth of that story."

"Free me!" shouted Cain.

"Not so. For if you have been so set in your
prison by the Will of Our Lord, it is not meet that
man should free you until the proper time."

Then did Cain roar out his rage, and in his
anger he made plain his own black heart for he
screamed:

"Had you loosed me as I asked, then would I
have rent you limb from limb, for my hate against
all men is hot!"

"So do I believe," replied Huon. And with the
mallet in his hand he went down again from that
mountain place.

159

XIII. HOW HUON WAS FERRIED BY A
DEMON ACROSS THE SEA AND
AFTERWARDS DREAMED AN OMINOUS
DREAM

When Huon came down from the mountain top,
the path he followed led him into a narrow cove
wherein was moored a boat as red as the fires of
Hell, with sails as black as the nights of sin, and
the master of this craft was a fearsome demon of
so monstrous a face and form that Huon was fain
to turn away his eyes, lest the sight breed in him
real terror.

This demon, sighting the Duke, shouted forth
in a loud and roaring voice, which brought stones
tumbling down the cliffs above them:

"Ha, Cain, and is it you yourself? A thousand
thousand years have I waited here for your com-
ing. Now show me speedily the sign agreed upon
and I shall set you across the sea that you may

be able to work all manner of ill in the world of
mortals!"

And Huon, rejoicing within him that he had not
freed Cain, not only to his own undoing but to the
sorrow of the world of men, spoke no word in re-
turn, only raised on high the mallet he carried
and stepped aboard the ship.

Straightway the demon cast off the lashings
which held the craft fast and took the tiller in his
taloned hand. Out of nowhere there arose a wind
which filled their darkaome sails and bore them
out to sea, carrying them on a course through the
waves. All night they voyaged thus, speaking no
word one to the other. And in the morning, so
swift had been that sailing, Huon saw before them
a fair harbor in which lay a multitude of ships at
anchor. His heart leaped high as he knew by the
banners upon them that these were of the fleet of
the Shah from which he had been lost.

Turning to the demon, he spoke for the first
time.

"Set roe ashore upon yonder spit of sand for here
be gathered a mighty army of mankind and
amongst them I may cause all manner of mischief
and dire trouble."

Hearing him, the demon laughed aloud and
smote his hands upon his hairy thighs for the
pleasure he took in such words. And he obeyed
readily, steering for the spit of sand reaching out
into the sea, saying, twixt roars of evil mirth:

"Verily will you serve our master well, 0 Cain.
I shall carry good report of you to him in Hell. But
tarry not too long at this sweet business of bring-

ing men to death and ruin, for there is other work
awaiting you."

Huon leaped ashore, and the demon and the
ship were gone in an instant, leaving him alone
by the sea. So he walked along the strand until
he came to the camp of the Shah. And there he
was made welcome with great joy and wonder,
which grew with every word of the story he had
to tell.

After his coming, they did take this city of Co-
lander which the army of the Shah had held in
siege, and many and great were the deeds of valor
done in that taking—chief among them being the
feats of arms performed by Huon. Dread of him
grew among the enemy so that whole companies
took flight from the field and rode away in dis-
order before the passage of the Shah's forces.

Thus did they march in triumph to Antioch,
Damascus and at last reached Jerusalem, where
Huon bowed himself at the Tomb of Our Lord and
prayed for the success of his arms in the field and
a safe return to Bordeaux and the relief of the
grievous troubles there.

Now in the plains beyond Jerusalem the Sar-
acens gathered all their armies into one, deter-
mined to fly no longer but to meet the foe in one
last battle. And to the Emir who was the com-
mander there came the Giant Dorbrye. Taller
than any two men of that company was he and
tusked were his jaws, as are the jaws of the wild
boar that lives in the depths of the forest. His
sword was the length of a man and his shield as
high as a city gate. The steed he rode was homed
like unto a bull and when it breathed it puffed
forth flame and smoke.

This Giant claimed of the Emir the right to
meet Huon in single combat and the Emir granted
him that right. So when the battle began Dorbrye
rode fiercely into the fray seeking the Duke, and
with each sweep of his sword he slew man or horse.

So terrible was this battle that the sun was
darkened by the flight of arrows overhead, and
the dust—torn up by the hooves of the mounts—
made worse the murk so that the day was as twi-
light.

In this mist Dorbrye at last found Huon and,
before the Duke could move, he slew Huon's horse
with one stroke and took the French knight up
with one hand, throwing him across his own sad-
dle before him. So did Huon think that his hour
of death had come at last, and he prayed aloud for
help against the dire fate which lay before him.
But Dorbrye's horse, coming into a place where
many dead lay thick upon the ground, stumbled
and fell, and both the Giant and Huon were
thrown from the saddle.

Huon won to his feet first and, before Dorbrye
could rise, the Duke aimed a shrewd blow at his
bare throat and so killed him. Then Huon mounted
upon the Giant's horse and rode back to the fight-
ing. Thereafter none could touch him by reason
of his great skill at arms and the belt of magic
gems which he wore.

At last the Saracen army fled the field and the
men of Persia were left victorious. They pitched
their tents by a river and that night feasted their
fill, taking much pleasure in it.

In the morning they followed the fleeing Sar-
acens, even to the walls of Acre where the Emir
took refuge—sending messengers this way and




that across all the infidel lands asking for aid.
Several of these messengers fell into the hands of
the Persians and having heard the tidings they
bore, Huon said to the Shah:

"My lord, by the Eternal Grace of Our Lord
Jesu, we have done many mighty deeds, freeing
much of the Holy Land from the rule of the un-
believer. But in the doing of this we have lost
many men and the land of Persia lies far away,
so we can hope for no aid from there. But this
Emir has sent messages far and near asking for
help against us and if he is fitly answered by only
a portion of those who hear him, then shall we be
ground to dust between the millstones of our ene-
mies. Therefore it will be wise to hold what we
have taken and not be greedy in seeking more."

All those in the presence of the Shah raised up
their voices in support of this advice and at last
the Persian ruler agreed that it was right.

But that night Huon dreamed a dark and awe-
some dream. For as in a vision he stood on the
wide plain without the walls of a mighty city. Here
was created a pyre for the burning of some crim-
inal. And, as he watched, out of the city came a
procession bearing the victim to be burned. But,
lo, it was not a criminal they threatened with so
cruel a death but his own fair lady!

He awoke from that dream with a cry of horror
and despair and ran straightway unto the Shah
and told him of that vision, saying that he must
return to France with all speed lest that horrid
dream prove true.

The Shah wept sorrowfully at their parting, but
he gave unto Huon seasoned men-at-arms and a

great treasure and he wished him well under the
power of God. So did Huon and Bernard take ship
once more for their native land, but there was no
rejoicing in their hearts—only fear.

XIV. OF CLARAMONDE AND HER
GREAT DANGER

Over the city of Bordeaux reigned the governor
the Emperor had placed there, and for a full year
had he held that office. Heavy were the burdens
he put upon that proud city so that men ofttimes
remembered their Duke Huon and his gentle lady
and in their hearts they hated the Emperor with
a black and ever growing hate. There were still
those amongst them who had once served in the
Duke's household and who had- fought right val-
iantly in the defense of the city. And now these
did band together and secretly plot that they
would, when the hour was right, strike boldly for
their freedom.

But in their midst was a traitor and he disclosed
all their plot unto the governor. So, in the night,
armed men surrounded the dwelling places of
those who had dared to hope for better days. And
all these were speedily seized and taken before

166

the governor, to be as quickly judged and sent out
of the city in chains for the long and weary march
to Mayence with only the gallows and a rope to
think of as their future.

Now the Abbot of Cluny—he who was fond un-
cle to Huon and the protector of Huon's daugh-
ter—heard of this happening. And straightway he
summoned to him those knights who owed service
to the Abbey. These he bade lead out their men
and ambush the Emperor's party to free those who
were being marched to their deaths.

And it all chanced as the Abbot had hoped. The
Emperor's men were routed and put to utter de-
feat, and their commander, a baron of the Em-
peror's own household, was killed. But the men
of Bordeaux were set free and came to Cluny to
claim protection of the Abbot, making many plans
against that day when they could enter again into
their city with triumph.

When the news of this defeat came to the Em-
peror his wrath waxed so hot that his words stran-
gled in his throat and he choked upon them until
he could shout:

"These men of Bordeaux be very devils for stub-
bornness. While any of Huon's house live so will
they continue to hold against me, rising up again
and again. Therefore shall I make an end to this—
for Huon himself be surely dead over the sea or
he would have returned long since slavering for
my blood as a hound in chase.

"So let the Duchess Claramonde be taken be-
yond the city walls and there let her be burnt after
the manner of a traitoress and let all those from
Bordeaux who lie within our ward be hung at that
same time!" '

167




And no man among all his court could turn him
from this purpose or soften his words.

Thus beyond the city walls was built a tall pyre
of seasoned wood, even as Huon had seen in his
evil dream, and by this was erected a forest of
gallows trees to hold those of Bordeaux who had
been forced to yield them when the city fell.

On the appointed day the Lady Claramonde and
her people were brought out of prison to face this
cruel fate. So pitiful was the lady and those who
followed her that the people of Mayence raised
loud their voices and cried out against their right-
ful lord, the Emperor, saying that no good would
ever thereafter come to that city or the land where
such a foul deed was done, nor would he who so
ordered it afterwards prosper. They closed their
doors and windows and bode inside their houses
in darkness and sorrow, praying for the souls of
those about to perish.

Now it chanced that the Duke Hildebert, who
was now the Emperor's heir, rode into Mayence
at that hour and he saw the men of Bordeaux,
with their Duchess at their head, on foot and in
chains being led to their deaths. And he asked
concerning this matter. When the truth was told
to him he was sore stricken with pity and horror,
and, setting spurs to his horse, he rode furiously
to where the Emperor was waiting and called
aloud to him:

"My good lord, I pray you in the Name of the
Lord Jesu, do not do this thing. For, if by your
orders this sweet lady and these people of Bor-
deaux die so, then will your name be remembered
with loathing by all men. If your quarrel lies with
the Duke Huon, then pursue it with him and not

with helpless women and prisoners surrendered
to your mercy. For only to the merciful will true
mercy be granted!"

But so blinded and held by the power of his
great hatred was the Emperor that he was as flint
to the pleading of Hildebert, and his answer came
cold and bitter:

"My lord Duke, you forget to whom you now
speak. If you do not bridle your foolish tongue it
may lead you into some such an end as these trai-
tors are now facing."

And when Hildebert would have protested
again his own friends surrounded him and bore
him struggling away, lest the Emperor make good
that threat.

Then were the people of Bordeaux, knight and
commoner alike, put upon the gallows and around
their throats were placed the hempen loops. While
the Lady Claramonde was made fast to the stake
and the brands heaped about her.

At that same hour King Oberon was holding
high revel for his kinswoman, the peerless Mor-
gan Ie Fay, and all was joy within his halls—save
that only Oberon himself sat with a bowed head
and sad countenance, until at last the Lady Mor-
gan said unto him:

"How now, fair cousin. Here is all joyful feasting
and fine frolic and yet you sit alone in sorrow and
silence. Why do you thus?"

Oberon made her answer in a low and melan-
choly voice.

"Sweet cousin, above all my kin and friends
here within the borders of our own magic land do
I love Huon, Duke of Bordeaux. By my sworn
promise is he my heir, to rule after me in these

halls until the end of mortal time. But because of
this I am bound by our laws not to aid him, since
he must win here by his own efforts. And now
behold what happens to the one he holds dearest
in all the world!"

He moved his hands across a mirror which hung
on the wall of the hall. The glass misted and when
it again cleared it showed to those who were with
him the plain before the walls of Mayence and
what chanced there. Then did the Elf knights
Gloriant and Malabron arise in their places and
go unto Oberon, kneeling before him in suppli-
cation. And Malabron spoke for the twain of them
when he said:

"Lord King, true by the laws of this land you
may not stretch forth your hand or power to now
rescue this lady. But we be not bound by that. And
though our power be not a tenth or a hundredth
part of yours, it is more than any mortal can stand
against. Let us go and succor the Duchess Clar-
amonde!"

With the shadow of hope upon him Oberon con-
sented and those two disappeared from before him.

So, as Claramonde stood watching with fearful
eyes the burning brand that the executioner bore
toward her, there appeared in the sky above May-
ence a flash of unearthly fire and out of the heart
of this sprang the Elf knights fully armed and
ready for war.

By their power the chains fell in dust from those
of Bordeaux and the men of Mayence were stricken
blind so that, when they were able to see once
more, Claramonde and her people stood unharmed

and free, giving thanks to the Most High for their
deliverance.

And even the Emperor was disturbed in his
mind so that he ordered the prisoners taken back
to the dungeons, but spoke no more against them.




XV. OF HUON'S RETURN TO FRANCE
AND H!S APPEARANCE AT THE COURT
OF THE EMPEROR

Huon returned secretly to France and journeyed
with his men to the Abbey of Cluny, letting no
one know of his coming. The Abbot marveled at
his safe arrival, for he had long mourned him as
one dead, and now he ordered that those in the
Abbey should give thanks to God for this good
happening and that a feast be made for Huon and
those who followed him.

Then did the Abbot also send for the baby Clar-
ette to be brought unto her father, and greatly did
Huon rejoice upon seeing his daughter and give
humble thanks unto his uncle for his exceedingly
good care of her. And the Duke brought in a chest
of rare gems and pieces of gold which was a portion
of the spoil gained in fighting the Saracens and
which he now settled upon his daughter as a
dowry. And about her neck he placed a fine neck-


lace of rubies set cunningly in gold, and he gave
rich gifts to the lady who nursed her.

Having been so pleased with looking upon his
daughter once more, he turned again to the Abbot
with these words:

"Dear kinsman, my heart is full and runneth
over with good will toward you for the way you
have served my daughter. If there is aught which
I may do for you in return, speak it aloud in this
hour."

The Abbot smiled upon him, but there was a
faintr shadow of sadness in his voice as he made
answer.

"Nay, fair son and kinsman, there is naught in
the power of man to grant me which I now desire.
Within the walls of Cluny is my world and it is
a good one. That which I might wish for is beyond
your power of attainment. For look you, I am an
old man, much worn by the years and no one can
bring me youth and strength again; Winter and
age have twisted these old bones and wasted the
flesh from my limbs. Who can turn that season
into spring once more?"

Then did Huon's eyes shine with happiness and
he hurried to the chamber given to him and from
his most precious possessions he brought forth the
second of the Apples of Paradise. This he set before
his uncle, urging him to eat thereof and speedily.

Wondering at the strange manner of his nephew,
the Abbot did as he was bid. Now as he ate a
strange thing came to pass. No longer did he seem
an old man bent by time and frosted by age. But
he sat straight and tall, once more a man in the
pride of his youth, and all those within the cham-
ber were struck dumb by this miracle. Then did

Huon relate how these apples had come into his
hands and all the rest of the long tale of his wan-
derings.

Having seen his daughter, the Duke now planned
to go into Mayence where he might, with the aid
of the Lord Jesu,~set free those who believed and
trusted in him, the chiefest being the Lady Clar-
amonde for whom his heart hungered with a pain
which never ceased.

So did he take the juice of nutshells and brown
his face and hands and let loose his hair to hang
untidily upon his shoulders. He put off his bright
mail, leaving on him only the belt of wondrous
gems. And this he did conceal under the worn
clothes of a pilgrim and a shabby cloak of the hue
of beaten ashes, so that he seemed one who might
beg his way from door to door.

And Bernard did likewise so that no man would
know him. In this guise they went into Mayence,
arriving there at Eastertide. The city was full of
pilgrims who had come thither to visit a shrine,
and from these pilgrims Huon learned two pieces
of news which were worth much to him.

The first was that when the Eastertide was over
the Emperor had sworn a most solemn oath before
all his lords that he would do to death all those
from Bordeaux and with them the Lady Clara-
monde. And this made Huon's heart cold within
him. Bernard urged that he go again to Cluny and
bring to Mayence those who were Huon's men that
they might make a desperate sortie to free their
lady from this dire peril.

But Huon said him nay for he thought upon the
second thing he had heard and there seemed to lie
within that the germ of hope.

174

"Long have we been at war," he said unto Ber-
nard, "and many men have we slain. But these
were unbelievers and not of our race and kin. If
we go up against the Emperor now with bared
swords and the harness of battle girt upon us,
more innocent blood will flow, all to no man's gain.
Still your hot blood and list now to me. It is the
custom of this Emperor to go to mass early upon
the Easter mom and when the mass is said and
done he will grant to the first asking it of him any
boon that man desires, swearing to that on the
high altar itself.

"Now it is in my mind to go into the church in
the early hours of this night and seek out a place
close to where the Emperor shall be. And if God
will it so, that first boon shall be mine. The Em-
peror dare not gainsay it afterward, lest he be
forsworn before the eyes of all Christendom!"

So Huon did as he had planned. He put on him
again the robe of a belted knight, but he did not
order his hair or wash the stain from his flesh.
And over this robe he pulled the beggar's cloak.
Then he went into the cathedral and took a place
not far from where the Emperor would stand. So
did he bide the remainder of the night, praying
for success in his venture.

In the very early morning the Emperor and his
court came to hear mass and few noted the beggar
who stood in the shadow, but when the mass began
Huon took from beneath his cloak a rosary. And
this rosary was made of fine gold and the beads
of it were carved gems, the cross wrought ivory.
And the Emperor, loving such treasures, saw
enough of it to wish to see more. So when the mass

175




was done he moved not from his place but beck-
oned Huon to approach him.

"Whence had you that treasure, pilgrim?" he
asked.

"From far lands, Lord Emperor, even from the
hand of the Holy Father in Rome." Huon held
closer the rosary and the Emperor feasted his eyes
upon it and coveted it greatly.

Then did the Duke stake his all upon one chance
and he said:

"Lord Emperor, the men of Mayence have told
me that on this Easter morn you do grant to the
first asker of it the boon of whatever he wishes.
Be this the truth?"

The Emperor, surprised, replied, "Pilgrim, it is
the truth."

"Then do I claim that boon, Lord Emperor!" And
Huon's voice was no longer that of a humble pil-
grim but rang with all the pride of his blood and
youth.

"It is thine, be what it may," returned the Em-
peror slowly, for he sensed that more lay behind
this than was clear to ear or eye.

"Free the Lady Claramonde and those of Bor-
deaux who lie within your power and with me
swear friendship and eternal peace!"

The Emperor started back and his face was as
bleak as winter as he demanded:

"Rash man, who are you to ask such a thing of
me?"

Then did Huon drop the beggar's cloak and
shake back his hair. Though the dark stain was
still upon him he was so comely that all with the

176

Emperor marveled at him and believed him surely
a prince of the blood royal. And he said, in his
clear and ringing voice:

"I be Huon, Duke of Bordeaux!"

177

XVI. HOW HUON MADE PEACE WITH
THE EMPEROR AND RECEIVED THE
MESSENGER OF OBERON

So astounded was the Emperor that he could speak
not a word in that instant and, when again his
voice came to him, he remembered the oath he
had sworn and that he must give this upstart
Duke the boon he asked of him and said:

"Much blood has been shed by the twain of us,
Lord Emperor. But know you—I have spent this
year in misery and despair. And in the Holy Land
I fought to free the Tomb of Our Lord from the
defilement of the infidel and there did I pray for
the forgiveness of my sins. Therefore I beseech
you most humbly—let there now be peace between
us and let us swear friendship before this holy
altar on the Day of the Resurrection of our dead
Lord and Master."

Then did the stone which had walled up the

heart of the Emperor crack and his frown was not
so black. So Huon, taking heart, continued:

"Liege man was I from birth to the King of
France. But in the hour of my greatest need he
came not to my succor, nor did he send even one
man-at-arms to my service. Therefore do I now
declare that my fealty to him is at an end and that
I owe him allegiance no longer. But Bordeaux is
no large fief, able to stand alone. So do I now make
petition unto you, Sire, to take it as a fief of your
crown and let me serve you for it!"

Now was the heart of the Emperor truly moved
and he put his hands over Huon's and took him
as his liege man, raising him up to his feet and
bestowing upon him the kiss of peace. So did all
there rejoice, knowing that strife and unhappiness
had come to an end at that moment.

The Emperor decreed a feast and to it came all
those of Bordeaux who had so long lain prisoners
in his dungeons. Not the least of these was the
Duchess ofClaramonde. And when Huon received
her again into his arms he wept with joy and gave
thanks aloud for this favor from Heaven.

From the inner pocket of his cloak he then took
the third and last of the Apples of Paradise and
this he laid in a dish of fair silver before the Em-
peror. The apple glowed with golden light and
from it arose such a sweet savor it was as if musk
and spices had been burned in the hall. Then the
Duke of Bordeaux related to the company the
story of the fruit and when he had done the Em-
peror did eat of it. His hair of gray darkened again
and his face became plump and ruddy, so that once
more he was in his comely youth. All his lords and

knights cried aloud in wonderment at the sight
and the Emperor had such joy as he had never
known before. So as Huon and his people departed
to their own city, they went with the love and good
will of all the nation of Alamayne.

Once more in Bordeaux, the city and those re-
leased from prison rejoiced at. their freedom. And
Huon, his lady, and their daughter dwelt in great
peace and happiness. But not for long was this to
be.

For at nighttime on a certain day of the dying
year a knight with a fair train of followers rode
into Bordeaux. No man had marked the manner
of their coming, they seemed to have sprung from
the earth itself. And they stayed not until they
came into the hall of the castle.

Having heard of this knight, Huon came forth
to greet him courteously, and, as the knight raised
the visor of his helmet, he looked upon and knew
that it was Malabron of the Elf realm whom he
had known beforetimes.

But the face of Malabron was sad and tired and
Huon mistrusted what message he might bring.
He led him to the upper table and offered him
meat and drink. But Malabron refused; saying:

"Lord Duke, my liege lord—the King Oberon—
has sent me hither with this message. It is close
now upon that time when he must go out of Elf-
land into Paradise as was foretold at his birth.
Therefore he commands you and your lady to come
unto him speedily that he may give into your
hands the rule of his kingdom before he departs
therefrom—"

Huon bowed his head and answered:

"Sir knight, I accept the command laid upon me

180

by your dread lord and master. Let me but know
the way that I must follow to come unto his land
and that I shall travel."

And Malabron replied:

"Get you and your lady down to the sea on the
second morn from this, and there you shall find
a ship awaiting you. It will bear you to the bound-
aries of our kingdom. But delay not, for our master
is weary and impatient to depart."

Having so delivered his message Malabron and
those with him vanished out of the hall as if they
had never been. Then did Huon summon unto him
the Abbot ofCluny and Bernard. And he told them
of the message from Oberon which he dare not
disobey. And he ended in this wise:

"Since my kingdom will not be of this mortal
earth I shall no longer walk among men nor sit
here in the castle of Bordeaux. But my daughter
Clarette is heir of my house and of my duchy and
to your care do I entrust her. Keep her safe and
guard well her inheritance until she comes to
womanhood. See that the lord she weds is in all
ways worthy of her so that she will be ever happy
and blest!"

The Abbot of Cluny and Bernard were full sad
at hearing these words and they longed for Huon
to remain with them. But they knew that by the
will of Oberon he had no choice.

Many tears did the Lady Claramonde shed as
she kissed her daughter and bade her farewell.
Also she said unto her lord:

"Elfland is truly not of this earth but the long-
ing of a mother's heart may well bridge the gulf
which lies between. I do not think that I now say
good-bye to this, my daughter, for all time."

181

Then did she put into the hands of the Abbot
her chest of jewels and order him to hold these
until the maiden be of years to delight in their
wearing. And she summoned all her women and
bade them have special care of her daughter.

Thus did Huon and Claramonde make ready to
depart out of Bordeaux for the last time.

182

XVII. HOW HUON AND CLARAMONDE
SAILED FOR OBERON'S KINGDOM
AND OF THEIR ADVENTURE WITH THE
WHITE MONKS

In the dawn of the next day Huon and his lady
bade farewell to Bordeaux and all those within its
gates whom they loved with all their hearts, and
Claramonde said unto her husband:

"My dear lord, save that this was your home
where you were born and brought to man's estate,
I have little love for this city, for here have our
sufferings been greater than our joys. But it is in
my mind that Clarette shall be happier in this
place than we have been, so do I go hence with a
lighter heart."

And she laid her hand upon the hand of Huon
right joyfully and alone they went down unto the
shore of the sea. There, even as Malabron had
foretold, was a ship fashioned of all the fragrant
woods of the East. And the nails which held the

183

wood were of gold and silver, and the sails of fine
silk, green in color after the uses of Elfland.

No captain trod the deck nor was there any
crew on board to bid them welcome. But when
they were safely upon her the sails arose without
hands to bend them and the ship sped out into the
ocean, as they watched the walls and towers of
Bordeaux grow less and less behind them.

So for three days they were borne across the
waves of the western ocean without danger or
mishap. All manner of dainty food and drink was
to be found and silk-hung couches awaited their
slumbers. For the first day, the Lady Claramonde
and Huon thought often, and with some sadness,^
of those left behind and spoke of them together.
But as the time sped as easily as the waves of the
sea they thought more and more of what would
be their life in the days to come and they wondered
as to what would be their fate in the strange Elf-
land which lay beyond the borders of the world
known to mortal men.

On the fourth day they saw before them land,
lying as a dark cloud upon the water, and almost
at sunset the ship came into a small harbor where
its anchor fell so that they knew that the voyage
had come to an end. But as the night was almost
upon them, the Lady Claramonde did not wish to
leave the safety of the ship for the unknown shore
where there seemed to be no manner of habitation.

Even as she hesitated there sounded clear on
the evening air the tolling of a bell, such as might
grace some church or abbey. And Huon, .smiling,
said:

"Dear heart, list to that and have no more fear
within you. For that be one of the signals of Chris-
154

tendom and if we are guided by it we shall reach
good shelter."

So heartened, she followed him from the ship
and they went inland from the sea until on the far
side of a hill they came upon a fair abbey set in
wide green fields as a peerless gem is set in gold.
As they came to the gate the bell left off its calling,
but a multitude of doves wheeled across the sky
and vanished beyond the wall.

When Huon rapped upon the wicket it was flung
wide, and there stood a monk clad all in robes of
purest white, who said to them:

"Enter, my children. Blessed be Our Lord for
bringing you hither to shelter within our walls
and give us opportunity to serve God's creatures,
for few come this way and we have but scant
chance to practice Christian charity."

Huon and Claramonde were brought into the
guest house of the abbey and there received with
great courtesy, such as might be granted a king
and-queen. Thus, because their hearts were
thankful for all the favors the Lord had shown
them, they arose at midnight to attend mass.

But, lo, when the service was but half completed
the monks left their places and filed from the
chapel. Now did Huon seize upon the last one in
the line, holding him by the full sleeve of his habit,
and he cried:

"Sir monk, why mock you thus Our Lord, saying
but half the mass?"

The monk tried in vain to pull free, making no
answer. But Huon held tight and with his other
hand he made the sign of the cross saying:

"By this blessed sign do I command you to an-

185

swer me—what manner of monk be you and why
is your mass broken?"

When Huon made the sign the monk shivered
through all his body as if he were suddenly lapped
by a chill wind. But he raised up his head and
with his two hands he folded back his cowl so that
they could look directly upon his face.

And, behold, it was dark and sad and not like
the visage of mortal man, for there dwelt on his
brow such sorrow as no one born of this world
could bear and live. Seeing^ this Huon dropped his
hold upon the other's sleeve and he asked for the
third time:

"Who are you—man or demon? Or be you one
of the dwellers within the boundaries of Elfland?"

And now the monk made answer saying: "Nei-
ther man, nor demon, nor of the Fairy are we. Not
of Elfland, or Hell, or of Earth. We are those who
once stood in the ranks of Heaven. And when
proud Lucifer made rebellion against Our Lord we
did not take up the sword to him, but neither did
we join those who strove with the hosts of angels.
Therefore we were sent out of Heaven to this land
which is on the border between the mortal world
and that which lies beyond the world of men, but
which is neither above nor below it. And here we
must bide until the Day of Judgment. If then we
can stand forth cleanly, without sin, but with
pride to praise Our Lord with joyful hearts, then
we may enter in again to our lost home. But the
weary waiting is like a brand laid upon us and we
have naught but everlasting regret to company
us through endless time!"

Once more did Huon make the sign between

186

them. And when he spoke, his voice was softened
by pity.

"If the prayers of mortals may aid you, then
know that we twain shall evermore remember you
in ours, Friend, let there be peace between us."

And a single tear dropped from the eye of the
monk as he nodded twice his head.

"Your words shall be for us as rain is for the
sun-parched land. Fain would we keep you with
us, but this half land is not for such as you. Behind
you lies the mortal world and before you Elfland.
Whither would you go?"

Huon took Claramonde by the hand as he made
answer:

"This be my wife, the Lady Claramonde, and I
am Huon, once Duke of Bordeaux in the realm of
France. But now we are under the command of
the King Oberon to journey into Elfland where he
is minded to render unto us the rule of that coun-
try."

When he had heard this the monk bowed low.

"Fair lord and lady, greatly are we honored by
your coming among us. At the breaking of the
dawn I myself shall lead you to that point from
which you may pass into your own domain."

So when the rose dawn light was in the sky the
monk led them forth from the White Abbey and
between two green hills. And there before them
lay a pleasant and smiling land wherefrom arose
the tall towers of castles and the glittering walls
of stout cities. Fairer than any they had ever seen
was that land. But the monk would not look upon
it. Rather did he cover his face with his two hands
as he said:

187

"Go forth into your own place and prosper there.
Before you lies now the land you seek."

And as Huon and Claramonde went down into
that green and golden land there sounded in the
air the trumpets of a mighty host as would hail
the coming of great and worthy souls.

XVIIL HOW HUON AND
CLARAMONDE WERE GREETED BY
OBERONAND CAME INTO THEIR
KINGDOM

Thus were these two welcomed into their land and
they came to the castle where Oberon was. Now
when he saw them enter his hall he arose in great
joy and came forward to them. And each he em-
braced and kissed in greeting, saying:

"Dear friends, now do I rest content, for you
have fulfilled the promise made long ago and have
come hither to take from me the heavy burden of
kingship, so that I may go hence and rest in Par-
adise. Now shall I summon unto this court all
those who owe service and loyalty to me so that
they may swear the same unto you."

And he took Huon and Claramonde to the top
of the highest tower in that keep and from a bow
of ebony and gold he loosed four arrows, north,
east, south and west. As these flew through the
air they gave forth a marvelous trilling which was
the summons of the High King of Elfland.

Then in answer to that there gathered from the

four corners of that land a diverse and wondrous
company. From the mountains came dwarfs and
kobolds, goblins and air sprites. From out of the
streams sprang merpeople and nixies and the
green kelpies. From the fire darted forth the glow-
ing salamanders and dragons, and out of the green
earth came the elves and will-o'-wisps, nymphs
and fauns.

To all these did Oberon speak of his going, and
they sorrowed, for long had he ruled them and just
and wise in all ways had been that rule. Then he
brought forward Huon and Claramonde, and all
those gathered there did swear to them fealty and
all loyalty.

But when this was done there came another
into that hall, behind him a train of armed war-
riors. And this was that Arthur who had once
reigned in Britain and for many years had dwelt
thereafter in Avalon between the worlds. And he
reproached Oberon with these words:

"How this. King Oberon? If you choose to go out
of your kingdom, that is your right, which no man
will gainsay you. But why have you summoned
this mortal, who is but a green youth, to rule in
your place? Elfland needs a strong hand over it
and that hand be mine!"

And those who had accompanied him echoed that
claim. But Oberon only shook his head and replied:

"It is true that the laws made by men do not
run in this land and our ways are not their ways.
But still are we subject to certain decisions which
may not be altered. Upon my first meeting with
this Huon it was made plain to me that it was he
who was ordained to follow me upon this throne.
So are we all bound—"

190

But the countenance of Arthur was red with
wrath and he broke in upon the words of Oberon.

"I, who was King in Britain, shall not be second
in this other world. Let this youth beware of me
if he dares to lay any commands upon me or mine!"

On hearing this Oberon, too, lost his serenity
and he replied hotly:

"Not yet has my power departed from me. So
I say unto you, Arthur, be not so rash in provoking
my wrath. For it is in my mind to lay a doom upon
you. Persist in this rebellion and you shall return
to the mortal world a ravening creature. Man by
day and wolf by night. And all shall hate and fear
you until your miserable death."

But Huon dared then to put out his hand and
touch the clenched fist of Oberon. And he said:

"Lord Kings, both of you be mighty men and pow-
erful lords. Raise not your anger against one an-
other over this matter. All men knoweth the worth
of Arthur of Britain. Who be I to take what is his?"

Oberon smiled then upon Huon, and he thought
for a moment before turning to Arthur with these
words:

"This other world be very great. No one, even
I, knows its true boundaries. And beyond it lies
that evil which is always pressing against the
lands of light. It is the duty of him who rules here
to be ever on his guard against the blackness—to
be at eternal war with the evil from beyond.
Therefore I give unto you, Arthur, the marches of
the East, to hold with all your strength and spirit.
And to you, Huon, I give the wardenship of the
West, and you shall both king it in this world with
no dispute between you."

Then did Huon and Arthur clasp hands in good

191




friendship and swear upon their honor that it
should be as Oberon had decided. '

So did Oberon put off hia crown and sword and
all the trappings of his kingship, and he blessed
his people there assembled to do him honor. Then
he kissed first Claramonde with the kiss of peace,
and then Huon and Arthur. Alone did he walk
down that hall, all making a clear path before him
and when he came nigh unto that great window
which formed one end of the room, there shone in
through it a bar of light, which was gold and sil-
ver, and all the colors of Heaven and earth inter-
mingled. And from this bar of light, which seemed
to those watching like unto a gate, there came the
sound of wondrous singing.

Oberon looked upon those of his court for the
last time. And he smiled full sweetly. Then he
stepped through this gate of Paradise and was
gone from tham.

Since the world of Elfland no longer borders so
close upon the world of mortals, having slipped
somewhat awry in time and space, no man truly
knows what now chances therein. But rumor says
that Huon holds well the marches of the West
against those evil things which breed in the dark
to trouble the souls of men and that this valiant
war never ceases nor shall until the Day of Judg-
ment. With the face of fair youth and the wisdom
of age he and his lady reign in Elfland to the
greater good of all mankind.

And this be the story of Huon, once Duke of
Bordeaux, the end of it being unknown to this
very hour.

192