
  Vernor Vinge


   


  THE UNGOVERNED

Al's Protection Racket operated out of Manhattan, Kansas. Despite the
name, it was a small, insurance-oriented police service with about
twenty thousand customers, all within one hundred kilometers of the main
shop. But apparently "Al" was some kind of humorist: His ads had a
gangster motif with his cops dressed like twentieth century hoodlums.
Wil Brierson guessed that it was all part of the nostalgia thing. Even
the Michigan State Police ? Wil's outfit ? capitalized on the public's
feeling of trust for old names, old traditions.

 

 Even so, there's something more dignified about a company with a name
like "Michigan State Police,"thought Brierson as he brought his flier
down on the pad next to Al's HQ. He stepped out of the cockpit into an
eerie morning silence: It was close to sunrise, yet the sky remained
dark, the air humid. Thunderheads march around half the horizon. A
constant flicker of lightning chased back and forth within those clouds,
yet there was not the faintest sound of thunder. He had seen a tornado
killer on his way in, a lone eagle in the far sky. The weather was
almost as ominous as the plea East Lansing HQ had received from Al's
just four hours earlier.

 

 A spindly figure came bouncing out of the shadows. "Am I glad to see
you! The name's Alvin Swensen. I'm the proprietor." He shook Wil's hand
enthusiastically. "I was afraid you might wait till the front passed
though." Swensen was dressed in baggy pants and a padded jacket that
would have made Frank Nitti proud. The local police chief urged the
other officer up the steps. No one else was outside; the place seemed
just as deserted as one might expect a rural police station early on a
weekday morning. Where was the emergency?

 

 Inside, a clerk (cop?) dressed very much like Al sat before a comm
console. Swensen grinned at the other. "It's the MSP, all right. They're
really coming, Jim. They're really coming!... Just come down the hall,
Lieutenant. I got my office back there. We should clear out real soon,
but for the moment I think it's safe."

 

 Wil nodded, more puzzled than informed. At the far end of the hall,
light spilled from a half-open door. The frosted glass surface was
stenciled with the words 'Big AI'. A faint smell of mildew hung over the
aging carpet and the woo, floor beneath settled perceptibly under Wil's
ninety kilo tread. Brierson almost smiled: maybe Al wasn't so crazy. The
gangster motif excused absolutely slovenly maintenance Few customers
would trust a normal police organization that kept its buildings like this.

 

 Big Al urged Brierson into the light and waved him to an overstuffed
chair. Though tall and angular, Swensen looker more like a school
teacher than a cop ? or a gangster. Hi reddish-blond hair stood out
raggedly from his head, a though he had been pulling at it, or had just
been wakened From the man's fidgety pacing about the room, Wil guesses
the first possibility more likely. Swensen seemed about at the end of
his rope, and Wil's arrival was some kind of reprieve. He glanced at
Wil's name plate and his grin spread even further. "W W Brierson. I've
heard of you. I knew the Michigan State Police wouldn't let me down;
they've sent their best."

 

 Wil smiled in return, hoping his embarrassment didn't show. Part of his
present fame was a company hype that h, had come to loathe. "Thank you,
uh, Big Al. We feel a special obligation to small police companies that
serve no-right-to bear-arms customers. But you're going to have to tell
me more. Why so secretive?"

 

 A1 waved his hands. "I'm afraid of blabbermouths. I couldn't take a
chance on the enemy learning I was bringing you into it until you were
on the scene and in action."

 

 Strange that he says "enemy," and not "crooks" or "bastards" or
"hustlers." "But even a large gang might be scared off knowing ?"

 

 "Look, I'm not talking about some punk gang. I'm talking about the
Republic of New Mexico. Invading. Us." He dropped into his chair and
continued more calmly. It was almost as if passing the information on
had taken the burden off himself. "You're shocked?"

 

 Brierson nodded dumbly.

 

 "Me too. Or I would have been up till a month ago. The Republic has
always had plenty of internal troubles. And even though they claim all
lands south of the Arkansas River, they have no settlements within
hundreds of kilometers of here. Even now I think this is a bit of
adventurism that can be squelched by an application of point force." He
glanced at his watch. "Look, no matter how important speed is, we've got
to do some coordinating. How many attack patrols are coming in after you?"

 

 He saw the look on Brierson's face. "What? Only one? Damn. Well I
suppose it's my fault, being secret like, but ?"

 

 Wil cleared his throat. "Big Al, there's only me. I'm the only agent
MSP sent."

 

 The other's face seemed to collapse, the relief changing to despair,
then to a weak rage. "G-God d-damn you to hell, Brierson. I may lose
everything I've built here, and the people who trusted me may lose
everything they own. But I swear I'm going to sue your Michigan State
Police into oblivion. Fifteen years I've paid you guys premiums and
never a claim. And now when I need max firepower, they send me one
asshole with a ten-millimeter popgun."

 

 Brierson stood, his nearly two-meter bulk towering over the other. He
reached out a bear-like hand to Al's shoulder. The gesture was a strange
cross between reassurance and intimidation. Wil's voice was soft but
steady, "The Michigan State Police hasn't let you down, Mr. Swensen. You
paid for protection against wholesale violence ? and we intend to
provide that protection. MSP hasnever defaulted on a contract." His
grip on Alvin Swensen's shoulder tightened with these last words. The
two eyed each other for a moment. Then Big Al nodded weakly, and the
other sat down.

 

 "You're right. I'm sorry... I'm paying for the results, not the
methods. But I know what we're up against... and I'm damned scared."

 

 "And that's one reason why I'm here, Al: To find out exactly what we're
up against before we jump in with our guns blazing and our pants down.
What are you expecting?"

 

 AI leaned back in the softly creaking chair. He looked out through the
window into the dark silence of the morning and for a moment seemed to
relax. However improbably, someone else was going to take on his
problems. "They started about three years ago. It seemed innocent enough
and it was certainly legal..." Though the Republic of New Mexico claimed
the lands from the Colorado on the west to the Mississippi on the east,
and north to the Arkansas, in f. most of their settlements were along
the Gulf Coast and Rio Grande. For most of a century, Oklahoma and
northern Texas had been uninhabited. The 'border' along the Arkansas sas
River had been of no real concern to the Republic which had plenty of
problems with its Water Wars on the Colorado ? and of even less concern
to the farmers at the southern edge of the ungoverned lands. During the
last ten years, immigration from the Republic toward the more prosperous
north had been steadily increasing. Few of the southerners stayed in the
Manhattan area: most jobs were further north. But during these last
three years, wealth, New Mexicans had moved into the area, men willing
to pa almost any price for farmland.

 

 "It's clear now that these people were stooges for the Republic
government. They paid more money than they could reasonably recoup from
farming ? and the purchase started right after the election of their
latest president. You know ? Hastings whatever his name is. Anyway, it
made pleasant boom time for a lot of us. If some wealthy New Mexicans
wanted isolated estates in the ungoverned land that was certainly their
business. All the wealth in New Mexico couldn't buy one tenth of Kansas,
anyway." At first the settlers had been model neighbors. They even
signed up with Al's Protection Racket and Midwest Jurisprudence. But as
the months passed, it became obvious that they were neither farmers nor
leisured rich. As near as the locals could figure it, they were some
kind of labor contractors. [?]An tin ending stream of trucks brought
raggedly dressed men am women from the cities of the south: Galveston,
Corpus Christi, even from the capital, Albuquerque. These folk were
housed in barracks the owners had built on the farms Anyone could see ?
looking in from above ? that the newcomers spent long hours working in
the fields.

 

 Those farms produced on a scale that surprised the locals ? and though
it was still not clear that it was a profitable operation, there was a
ripple of interest in the Grange journals; might manual labor hold an
economic edge over the automatic equipment rentals? Soon the workers
were hiring out to local farmers. "Those people work harder than any
reasonable person, and they work dirt cheap. Every night, their contract
bosses would truck'em back to the barracks, so our farmers had scarcely
more overhead than they would with automatics. Overall, the NMs underbid
the equipment rental people by five percent or so."

 

 Wil began to see where all this was leading. Someone in the Republic
seemed to understand Midwest Jurisprudence. "Hmm, you know, AI, if I
were one of those laborers, I wouldn't hang around in farm country.
There are labor services up north that can get an apprentice butler more
money than some rookie cops make. Rich people will always want servants,
and nowadays the pay is tremendous."

 

 Big Al nodded. "We've got rich folks, too. When they saw what these
newcomers would work for, they started drooling. And that's when things
began to get sticky." At first the NM laborers could scarcely understand
what they were being offered. They insisted that they were required to
work when and where they were told. A few, a very few at first, took the
job offers. "They were really scared, those first ones. Over and over,
they wanted assurances that they would be allowed to return to their
families at the end of the work day. They seemed to think the deal was
some kidnap plot rather than an offer of employment. Then it was like an
explosion: they couldn't wait to drop the farm jobs. They wanted to
bring their families with them."

 

 "And that's when your new neighbors closed up the camps?"

 

 "You got it, pal. They won't let the families out. And we know they are
confiscating the money the workers bring in."

 

 "Did they claim their people were on long-term contracts?"

 

 "Hell, no. It may be legal under justice Inc, but indentured servitude
isn't under Midwest- and that's who they signed with. I see now even
that was deliberate.

 

 "It finally hit the fan yesterday. The Red Cross flew a guy out from
Topeka with a writ from a Midwest judge: He was to enter each of the
settlements and explain to those poor folks how they stood with the law.
I went along with a couple of my boys. They refused to let us in and
punched out the Red Cross fellow when he got insistent. Their chief
thug- fellow named Strong ? gave me a signed policy cancellation, and
told me that from now on they would handle all their own police and
justice needs. We were then escorted off the property ? at gunpoint."

 

 "So they've gone armadillo. That's no problem. But the workers are
still presumptively customers of yours?"

 

 "Not just presumptively. Before this blew up, a lot of them had signed
individual contracts with me and Midwest. The whole thing is a setup,
but I'm stuck."

 

 Wil nodded. "Right. You're only choice was to call in someone with
firepower, namely my company."

 

 Big Al leaned forward, his indignation retreating before fear. "Of
course. But there's more, Lieutenant. Those workers ? those slaves -
were part of the trap that was set for us. But most of them are brave,
honest people. They know what's happening, and they aren't any happier
about it than I am. Last night, after we got our butts kicked, three of
them escaped. They walked fifteen kilometers into Manhattan to see me,
to beg me not to intervene. To beg me not to honor the contract.

 

 "And they told me why: For a hundred kilometer stretch of their truck
ride up here, they weren't allowed to see the country they were going
through. But they heard plenty. And one of them managed to work a peep
hole in the side of the truck. He saw armored vehicles and attack
aircraft under heavy camouflage just south of the Arkansas. The damn New
Mexicans have taken part of their Texas garrison force and holed it up
less than ten minutes flying time from Manhattan. And they're ready to
move."

 

 It was possible. The Water Wars with Aztlan had been winding down these
last few years. The New Mexicans should have equipment reserves, even
counting what they needed to keep the Gulf Coast cities in line. Wil got
up and walked to the window. Dawn was lighting the sky above the far
cloud banks. There was green in the rolling land that stretched away
from the police post. Suddenly he felt very exposed here: death could
come out of that sky with precious little warning. W W Brierson was no
student of history, but he was an old-time movie freak, and he had seen
plenty of war stories. Assuming the aggressor had to satisfy some kind
of public or world opinion, there had to be a provocation, an excuse for
the massive violence that would masquerade as self-defense. The New
Mexicans had cleverly created a situation in which Wil Brierson ? or
someone like him ? would be contractually obligated to use force against
their settlements.

 

 "So. If we hold off on enforcement, how long do you think the invasion
would be postponed?" It hurt to suggest bending a contract like that,
but there was precedent: in hostage cases you often used time as a weapon.

 

 "It wouldn't slow 'em up a second. One way or another they're moving on
us. I figure if we don't do anything, they'll use my 'raid' yesterday as
their excuse. The only thing I can see is for MSP to put everything it
can spare on the line when those bastards come across. That sort of
massive resistance might be enough to scare 'em back."

 

 Brierson turned from the window to look at Big Al. He understood now
the shaking fear in the other. It had taken guts for the other to wait
here through the night. But now it was W. W. Brierson's baby. "Okay, Big
Al. With your permission, I'll take charge."

 

 "You got it, Lieutenant!" Al was out of his chair, a smile splitting
his face.

 

 Wil was already starting for the door. "The first thing to do is get
away from this particular ground zero. How many in the building?"

 

 "Just two besides me."

 

 "Round 'em up and bring them to the front room. If you have any
firearms, bring them, too."

 

 Wil was pulling his comm equipment out of the gunship when the other
three came out the front door of AI's HQ and started toward him. He
waved them back. "If they play as rough as you think, they'll grab for
air superiority first thing. What kind of ground vehicles do you have?"

 

 "Couple of cars. A dozen motorbikes. Jim, open up the garage." The
zoot-suited trooper hustled off. Wil looked with some curiosity at the
person remaining with Al. This individual couldn't be more than fourteen
years old. She was weighted down with five boxes, some with makeshift
carrying straps, others even less portable. Most looked like
communications gear. The kid was grinning from ear to ear. Al said,
"Kiki van Steen, Lieutenant. She's a wargame fanatic ? for once it may
be worth something."

 

 "Hi, ME."

 

 "Pleased to meetcha, Lieutenant." She half-lifted one of the
suitcase-size boxes, as though to wave. Even with all the gear, she
seemed to vibrate with excitement.

 

 "We have to decide where to go, and how to get there. The bikes might
be best, Al. They're small enough to?"

 

 "Nah." It was Kiki. "Really, Lieutenant, they're almost as easy to spot
as a farm wagon. And we don't have to go far. I checked a couple minutes
ago, and no enemy aircraft are up. We've got at least five minutes."

 

 He glanced at Al, who nodded. "Okay, the car it is."

 

 The girl's grin widened and she waddled off at high speed toward the
garage. "She's really a good kid, Lieutenant. Divorced though. She
spends most of what I pay her on that wargame equipment. Six months ago
she started talking about strange things down south. When no one would
listen, she shut up. Thank God she's here now. All night she's been
watching the south. We'll know the second they jump off."

 

 "You have some hidey-hole already set, Al?"

 

 "Yeah. The farms southwest of here are riddled with tunnels and caves.
The old Fort Riley complex. Friend of mine owns a lot of it. I sent most
of my men out there last night. It's not much, but at least they won't
be picking us up for free."

 

 Around them insects were beginning to chitter, and in the trees west of
the HQ there was a dove. Sunlight lined the cloud tops. The air was
still cool, humid. And the darkness at the horizon remained. Twister
weather.Now who will benefit from that?

 

 The relative silence was broken by the sharp coughing of a piston
engine. Seconds later, an incredible antique nosed out of the garage
onto the driveway. Wil saw the long black lines of a pre-1950 Lincoln.
Brierson and Big Al dumped their guns and comm gear into the back seat
and piled in.

 

 This nostalgia thing can be carried too far,Wil thought. A restored
Lincoln would cost as much as all the rest of AI's operation. The
vehicle pulled smoothly out onto the ag road that paralleled the HQ
property, and Wil realized he was in an inexpensive reproduction. He
should have known Big Al would keep costs down.

 

 Behind him the police station dwindled, was soon lost in the rolling
Kansas landscape. "Kiki. Can you get a line-of-sight on the station's mast?"

 

 The girl nodded. "Okay. I want a link to East Lansing that looks like
it's coming from your station house."

 

 "Sure." She phased an antenna ball on the mast, then gave Wil her
command mike. In seconds he had spoken the destination codes and was
talking first to the duty desk in East Lansing ? and then to Colonel
Potts and several of the directors.

 

 When he was finished, Big Al looked at him in awe. "One hundred assault
aircraft! Four thousand troopers! My God. I had no idea you could call
in that sort of force."

 

 Brierson didn't answer immediately. He pushed the mike into Kiki's
hands and said. "Get on the loudmouth channels, Kiki. Start screaming
bloody murder to all North America." Finally he looked back at Al,
embarrassed. "We don't, AI. MSP has maybe thirty assault aircraft,
twenty of them helicopters. Most of the fixed wing jobs are in the
Yukon. We could put guns on our search and rescue ships ? we do have
hundreds of those ? but it will take weeks."

 

 Al paled, but the anger he had shown earlier was gone. "So it was a bluff?"

 

 Wil nodded. "But we'll get everything MSP has, as fast as they can
bring it in. If the New Mexican investment isn't too big, this may be
enough to scare 'em back." Big Al seemed to shrink in on himself. He
gazed listlessly over Jim's shoulder at the road ahead. In the front
seat, Kiki was shrilly proclaiming the details of the enemy's movements,
the imminence of their attack. She was transmitting call letters and
insignia that could leave no doubt that her broadcast came from a
legitimate police service.

 

 The wind whipping through the open windows brought the lush smells of
dew and things dark green. In the distance gleamed the silver dome of a
farm's fresh produce bobble. They passed a tiny Methodist church,
sparkling white amidst flowers and lawn. In back, someone was working in
the pastor's garden.

 

 The road was just good enough to support the big tires of farm
vehicles. Jim couldn't do much over fifty kph. Every so often, a wagon
or tractor would pass them going the other way -going off to work in the
fields. The drivers waved cheerfully at the Lincoln. Atypical farm
country morning in the ungoverned lands. How soon it would change. The
news networks should have picked up on Kiki by now. They would have
their own investigative people on the scene in hour with live holo
coverage of whatever the enemy chose to do. Their programming, some of
it directed into the Republic, might be enough to turn the enemy's
public opinion against its government.Wishful thinking.

 

 More likely the air above them would soon be filled with screaming
metal. The end of a generation of peace.

 

 Big Al gave a short laugh. When Wil looked at him questioningly, the
small-town cop shrugged. "I was just thinking. This whole police
business is something like a lending bank. Instead of gold, MSP backs
its promises with force. This invasion is like a run on your 'bank of
violence.' You got enough backing to handle normal demands, but when it
all comes due at once... "

 

 ... You wind up dead or enslaved.Wil's mind shied away from the
analogy. "Maybe so, but like a lot of banks, we have agreements with
others. I'll bet Portland Security and the Mormons will loan us some
aircraft. In any case, the Republic can never hold this land. You run a
no-right-to bear-arms service; but a lot of people around here are armed
to the teeth."

 

 "Sure. My biggest competitor is justice, Inc. They encourage their
customers to invest in handguns and heavy home security. Sure. The
Republic will get their asses kicked eventually. But we'll be dead and
bankrupt by then-and so will a few thousand other innocents."

 

 Al's driver glanced back at them. "Hey, Lieutenant, why doesn't MSP pay
one of the big power companies to retaliate ? bobble places way inside
the Republic?"

 

 Wil shook his head. "The New Mexico government is sure to have all its
important sites protected by Wachendon suppressors."

 

 Suddenly Kiki broke off her broadcast monolog and let out a whoop.
"Bandits! Bandits!" She handed a display flat over the seat to Al. The
format was familiar, but the bouncing, jostling ride made it hard to
read. The picture was base on a sidelooking radar view from orbit, with
a lot of date added. Green denoted vegetation and pastel overlay, showed
cloud cover. It was a jumble till he noticed that Manhattan and the
Kansas River were labeled. Kiki zoomed up the magnification. Three red
dots were visibly accelerating from a growing pockwork of red dots to
the south. The three brightened, still accelerating. "They just broke
cloud cover," she explained. Beside each of the dots a moving legend
gave what must be altitude and speed.

 

 "Is this going out over your loudmouth channel?"

 

 She grinned happily. "Sure is! But not for long." She reached back to
point at the display. "We got about two minutes before Al's stationhouse
goes boom. I don't want to risk a direct satellite link from the car,
and anything else would be even more dangerous."

 

 Point certain,thought Wil.

 

 "Geez, this is incredible, just incredible. For two years the
Warmongers ? that's my club, you know ? been watching the Water Wars. We
got software, hardware, cryptics everything to follow what's going on.
We could predict, and bet against other clubs, but we could never
actually participate. And now we have a realroar, righthere!" She
lapsed into awed silence, and Wil wondered fleetingly if she might be
psychopathic, and not merely young and naive.

 

 "Do you have outside cameras at the police station?" He was asking Kiki
as much as Al. "We should broadcast the actual attack."

 

 The girl nodded. "I grabbed two channels. I got the camera on the comm
mast pointing southwest. We'll have public opinion completely nailed on
this."

 

 "Let's see it."

 

 She made a moue. "Okay. Not much content to it, though." She flopped
back onto the front seat. Over her shoulder, Wil could see she had an
outsized display flat on her lap. It was another composite picture, but
this one was overlaid with cryptic legends. They looked vaguely
familiar. Then he recognized them from the movies: They were the old,
old shorthand for describing military units and capabilities. The
Warmongers Club must have software for translating multispec satellite
observations into such displays. Hell, they might even be able to listen
in on military communications. And what the girl had said about public
opinion -the club seemed to play war in a very universal way. Theywere
crazy, but they might also be damned useful.

 

 Kiki mumbled something into her command mike, and the flat Al was
holding split down the middle: on the left they could follow the enemy's
approach with the map, on the right they saw blue sky and farmland and
the parking lot by the stationhouse. Wil saw his gunship gleaming in the
morning sunlight, just a few meters below the camera's viewpoint.

 

 "Fifteen seconds. They might be visible if you look south."

 

 The car swerved toward the shoulder as Jim pointed out the window: "I
see 'em!"

 

 Then Wil did, too. A triple of black insects, silent because of
distance and speed. They drifted westwards, disappeared behind trees.
But to the camera on the comm mast, they did not drift: they seemed to
hang in the sky above the parking lot, death seen straight on. Smoke
puffed from just beneath them and things small and black detached from
the bodies of the attack craft ? which now pulled up. The planes were so
close that Wil he could see shape to them, could see sun glint from
canopies. Then the bombs hit.

 

 Strangely, the camera scarcely jolted, but started slowly to pan
downward. Fire and debris roiled up around the viewpoint. A rotor
section from his flier flashed past ? and then the display went gray. He
realized that the panning had not been deliberate: The high comm mast
had been severed and was toppling.

 

 Seconds passed and sharp thunder swept over the car, followed by the
fast-dying scream of the bombers climbing back into the sky.

 

 "So much for the loudmouth channels," said Kiki. "I'm for keeping quiet
till we get underground."

 

 Jim was driving faster now. He hadn't seen the display, but the sounds
of the explosions were enough to make all but the least imaginative run
like hell. The road had been bumpy, but now seemed like washboard. Wil
gripped the seat ahead of him. If the enemy connected them with the
broadcasts...

 

 "How far, AI?"

 

 "Nearest entrance is about four kilometers as the crow flies, but we
gotta go all around the Schwartz farm to get to it." He waved at the
high, barbed-wire fence along the right side of the road. Corn fields
stretched away north of it. In the distance, Wil saw something a
harvester? ? amidst the green. "It'll take us fifteen minutes"

 

 "Ten!" claimed Jim emphatically, and the ride became still wilder.

 

 "? to make it around the farm."

 

 They crested a low hill. Not more than three hundred meters distant,
Wil could see a side road going directly north. "But we could take that."

 

 "Not a chance. That's on Schwartz land." Big Al glanced at the state
trooper. "And I ain't just being law-abiding, Lieutenant. We'd be as
good as dead to do that. Jake Schwartz went armadillo about three years
ago. See that hulk out there in the field?" He tried to point, but his
arm waved wildly.

 

 "The harvester?"

 

 "That's no harvester. It's armor. Robot, I think. If you look careful
you may see the gun tracking us." Wil looked again. What he had thought
was a chaff exhaust now looked more like a high velocity catapult.

 

 Their car zipped past the T -intersection with the Schwartz road and
Wil had a glimpse of a gate, and keep-out signs surmounted by what
looked like human skulls. The farm west of the side road seemed
undeveloped. A copse at the top of a near hill might have hid farm
buildings.

 

 "The expense. Even if it's mostly bluff..."

 

 "It's no bluff. Poor Jake. He always was self-righteous and a bit of a
bully. His police contract was with justice, Inc and he claimed even
they were too bleedin'-heart for him. Then one night his kid ? who's
even stupider than Jake got pig drunk and killed another idiot.
Unfortunately for Jake's boy, the victim was one of my customers. There
are no amelioration clauses in the MidwestJustice Inc agreements.
Reparations aside, the kid will be locked up for a long time. Jake swore
he'd never contract his rights to a court again. He has a rich farm, and
since then he's spent every gAu from it on more guns, more traps, more
detectors. I hate to think how they live in there. There are rumors he's
brought in deathdust from the Hanford ruins, just in case anybody
succeeds in getting past everything else."

 

 Oh boy.Even the armadillos up north rarely went that far.

 

 The last few minutes Kiki had ignored them, all her attention on the
strategy flat on her lap. She wore a tiny headset and was mumbling
constantly into her command mike. Suddenly she spoke up. "Oops. We're
not going to make it, Big Al." She began folding the displays, stuffing
them back into her equipment boxes. "I monitored. They just told their
chopper crews to pick us up. They got us spotted easy. Two, three
minutes is all we have."

 

 Jim slowed, shouted over his shoulder. "How about if I drop you and
keep going? I might be kilometers gone before they stop me." Brierson
had never noticed any lack of guts among the unarmed police services.

 

 "Good idea! Bye!" Kiki flung open her door and rolled off into the deep
and apparently soft vegetation that edged the road.

 

 "Kiki!" screamed Big Al, turning to look back down the road. They had a
brief glimpse of comm and processor boxes bouncing wildly through the
brush. Then Kiki's blond form appeared for an instant as she dragged the
equipment deeper into the green.

 

 From the trees behind them they could hear thethupthupthup of rotors.
Two minutes had been an overstatement. Wil leaned forward. "No, Jim.
Drive like hell. And remember: there were only three of us."

 

 The other nodded. The car squealed out toward the center of the road,
and accelerated up past eighty. The roar and thump of their progress
momentarily drowned out the sound of pursuit. Thirty seconds passed, and
three helicopters appeared over the tree line behind them. Dowe get
what they gave the stationhouse? An instant later white flashed from
their belly guns. The road ahead erupted in a geyser of dirt and rock.
Jim stepped on the brakes and the car swerved to a halt, dipping and
bobbing among the craters left by the shells. The car's engine died and
the thumping of rotors was a loud, almost physical pressure around them.
The largest craft**settled to earth amidst its own dust devil. The other
two circled, their autocannons locked on Big Al's Lincoln.

 

 The passenger hatch on the grounded chopper slid back and two men in
body armor hopped out. One waved his submachine gun at them, motioning
them out of the car. Brierson and the others were hustled across the
road, while the second soldier went to pick up the equipment they had in
the car. Wil looked back at the scene, feeling the dust in his mouth and
on his sweating face- the ashes of humiliation.

 

 His pistol was pulled from its holster. All aboard, gentlemen." The
words were spoken with a clipped, Down West accent.

 

 Wil was turning when it happened: A flash of fire and a muffled thud
came from one of the hovering choppers. Its tail rotor disappeared in a
shower of debris. The craft spun uncontrollably on its main rotor and
fell onto the roadway behind them. Pale flame spread along fuel lines,
sputtering in small explosions. Wil could see injured crew trying to
crawl out.

 

 "I saidget aboard ." The gunman had stepped back from them, his
attention and the muzzle of his gun still on his captives. Wil guessed
the man was a veteran of the Water Wars ? that institutionalized
violence which New Mexico and Aztlan called "warfare between nations."
Once given a mission, he would not be distracted by incidental catastrophes.

 

 The three "prisoners of war" stumbled into the relative darkness of the
helicopter's interior. Wil saw the soldier still standing outside look
back toward the wreck, and speak emphatically into his helmet mike. Then
he hopped on and pulled the hatch to. The helicopter slid into the air,
hanging close to the ground as it gradually picked up speed. They were
moving westwards from the wreck, and there was no way they could look
back through the tiny windows.

 

 An accident?Who could have been equipped to shoot down an armored
warcraft in the middle of Kansas fields? Then Wil remembered: Just
before it lost its tail, the chopper had drifted north of the roadway,
past the high fence that marked Armadillo Schwartz's land. He looked at
Big Al, who nodded slightly. Brierson sat back in the canvas webbing and
suppressed a smile. It was a small thing on the scale of the invasion,
but he thanked God for armadillos. Now it was up to organizations like
the Michigan State Police to convince the enemy that this was just the
beginning, that every kilometer into the ungoverned lands would cost
them similarly.

 

 One hundred and eighty kilometers in six hours. Republican casualties:
one motorcycletruck collision, and one helicopter crash that probably a
mechanical failure, Edward Strong, Special Advisor to the President,
felt a satin fled smile come to his lips every time he glanced at the
situation board. He had seen more casualties on a Freedom. Day parade
through downtown Albuquerque. His own analysis for the President ? as
well as the larger, less imaginative analysis from JCS -had predicted
that extending the Republic through Kansas to the Mississippi would be
almost trivial. Nevertheless, after having fought meter by bloody meter
with the fanatics of Aztlan, it was a strange feeling to be advancing
hundreds of kilometers each day.

 

 Strong paced down the narrow aisle of the Command and Control van, past
the analysts and clerks. He stood for a moment by the rear door, feeling
the air-conditioning billow chill around his head. Camouflage netting
had been laid over the van, but he could see through it without
difficulty: green leaves played tag with shadows across pale yellow
limestone. They were parked in a wooded creek bed on the land
Intelligence had bought several years earlier. Somewhere to the north
were the barracks which now confined the people Intelligence had
imported, allegedly to work the farms. Those laborers had provided
whatever legal justification was needed for this move into the
ungoverned lands. Strong wondered if any of them realized their role ?
and realized that in a few months they would be free of poverty,
realized that they would own farms in a land that could be made
infinitely more hospitable than the deserts of the Southwest.

 

 Sixteen kilometers to the northeast lay Manhattan. It was a minor goal,
but the Republic's forces were cautious. It would be an important ?
though small ? test of their analysis. There were Tinkers in that town
and in the countryside beyond. The precision electronics and related
weapons that came out of the Tinkers' shops were worthy of respect and
caution. Privately, Strong considered them to be the only real threat to
the success of the invasion he had proposed to the President three years
earlier. (Three years. Of planning, of cajoling resources from other
departments, of trying to inject imagination into minds that had been
closed for decades. By far the easiest part had been the operations here
in Kansas.)

 

 The results of the move on Manhattan would be relayed from here to
General Crick at the head of the armor driving east along Old 70. Later
in the afternoon, Crick's tank carriers should reach the outskirts of
Topeka. The Old US highway system provided a mode of armored operations
previously unknown to warfare. If the taking of Manhattan went as
planned, then Crick might have Topeka by nightfall and be moving the
remainder of his forces on to the Mississippi.

 

 Strong looked down the van at the time posted on the situation board.
The President would be calling in twenty minutes to witness the move
against Manhattan. Till then a lull gapped in Strong's schedule. Perhaps
there was time for one last bit of caution. He turned to the bird
colonel who was his military liaison*.*"Bill, those three locals you
picked up you know, the protection racket people ? I'd like to talk to
them before the Chief calls in."

 

 "Here?"

 

 "If possible."

 

 "Okay." There was faint disapproval in the officer's voice. Strong
imagined that the Bill Alvarez couldn't quite see bringing enemy agents
into the C&C van. But what the hell, they were clean ? and there was no
way that they could report what they saw here. Besides, he had to stay
in the van in case the Old Man showed up early.

 

 Minutes later, the three shuffled into the conference area at the front
of the van. Restraints glinted at their hands and ankles. They stood in
momentary blindess in the darkness of the van, and Strong had a chance
to look them over: three rather ordinary human beings, dressed in
relatively extraordinary ways. The big black wore a recognizable
uniform, complete with badges, side-arm holster and what appeared to be
riding boots. He looked the model fascist. Strong recognized the
Michigan State "Police" insignia on his sleeve. MSP was one of the most
powerful gangster combines in the ungoverned lands. Intelligence
reported they had some modern weapons ? enough to keep their "clients"
in line, anyway.

 

 Sit down, gentlemen." Amidst a clanking of shackles, the three sat,
sullen. Behind them an armed guard remained standing. Strong glanced at
the intelligence summary he had punched up. "Mr., uh, Lieutenant
Brierson, you may be interested to know that the troops and aircraft you
asked your bosses for this morning have not materialized. Our
intelligence people haven't changed their estimate that you were making
a rather weak bluff."

 

 The northerner just shrugged, but the blond fellow in the outrageously
striped shirt ? Alvin Swensen, the report named him ? leaned forward and
almost hissed. "Maybe, maybe not, asshole! But it doesn't matter. You're
going to kill a lot of people, but in the end you'll be dragging your
bloody tail back south."

 

 Figuratively speaking, Strong's ears perked up. "How is that, Mr. Swensen?"

 

 "Read your history. You're stealing from a free people now -not a bunch
of Aztlan serfs. Every single farm, every single family is against you,
and these are educated people, many with weapons. It may take a while.
It may destroy a lot of things we value. But every day you stay here,
you'll bleed. And when you've bled enough to see this, then you'll go home."

 

 Strong glanced at the casualty report on the situation board, and felt
laughter stealing up. "You poor fool. What free people? We get your
video, your propaganda. But what does it amount to? There hasn't been a
government in this part of the continent for more than eighty years. You
petty gangsters have the guns and have divided up the territory. Most of
you don't even allow your 'clients' firearms. I'll wager that the
majority of your victims will welcome a government where there is a
franchise to be exercised, where ballots and not MSP bullets decide issues.

 

 "No, Mr. Swensen, the little people in the ungoverned lands have no
stake in your status quo. And as for the armed groups fighting some kind
of guerrilla war against us... Well, you've had it easier than you know
for along time. You haven't lived in a land as poor as old New Mexico.
Since the Bobble War, we've had to fight for every liter of water,
against an enemy far more determined and bloodthirsty than you may
imagine. We have prevailed, we have revived and maintained democratic
government, and we have remained free men?"

 

 "Sure. Free like the poor slobs you got locked up over there." Swensen
waved in the direction of the workers' barracks.

 

 Strong leaned across the narrow conference table to pin Swensen with
his glare. "Mister, I grew up as one of 'those slobs.' In New Mexico,
even people that poor have a chance to get something better. This land
you claim is practically empty! You don't know how to farm it, you don't
have a government to manage large dam and irrigation projects, you don't
even know how to use government agriculture policy to encourage its
proper use by individuals.

 

 "Sure, those workers couldn't be told why they were brought here. But
when this over, they will be heroes, with homesteads they had never
imagined being able to own."

 

 Swensen rocked back before the attack, but was plainly
unconvinced.Which makes sense, thought Strong. Horncan a wolf imagine
anyone sincerely wishing good for sheep?

 

 An alert light glowed on Strong's display and one of the clerks
announced, "Presidential transmission under way, Mr. Strong." He swore
behind his teeth. The Old Man was early. He'd hoped to get some
information out of these three, not just argue politics.

 

 A glowing haze appeared at the head of the conference table and quickly
solidified into the image of the fourth President of the Republic.
Hastings Martinez was good-looking with bio-age around fifty years ? old
enough to inspire respect, young enough to appear decisive. In Strong's
opinion, he was not the best president the Republic had seen, but he had
the advisor's respect and loyalty nevertheless. There was something in
the very responsibility of the office of the Presidency that made its
holder larger than life.

 

 "Mr. President," Strong said respectfully.

 

 "Ed," Martinez's image nodded. The projection was nearly as substantial
as the forms of those truly present; Strong didn't know whether this was
because of the relative darkness within the van, or because Martinez was
transmitting via fiber from his estate in Alva, just three hundred
kilometers away.

 

 Strong waved at the prisoners. "Three locals, sir. I was hoping to?"

 

 Martinez leaned forward. "Why, I think I've seen you before." He spoke
to the MSP officer.**"The ads Michigan State Police uses; our
intelligence people have shown me some. You protect MSP's client mobs
from outside gangs."

 

 Brierson nodded, smiled wryly. Strong recognized him now and kicked
himself for not noticing earlier. If those ads were correct, then
Brierson was one of the top men in the MSE

 

 "They make you out to be some sort of superman. Do you honestly think
your people can stop a modern, disciplined army?"

 

 "Sooner or later, Mr. Martinez. Sooner or later."

 

 The President smiled, but Strong wasn't sure whether he was piqued or
truly amused. "Our armor is approaching Manhattan on schedule, sir. As
you know, we regard this action as something of a bench mark. Manhattan
is almost as big as Topeka, and has a substantial cottage electronics
industry. It's about the closest thing to a city you'll find in the
ungoverned lands." Strong motioned for the guard to remove the three
prisoners, but the President held up his hand.

 

 "Let 'em stay, Ed. The MSP man should see this firsthand. These people
may be lawless, but I can't believe they are crazy. The sooner they
realize that we have overwhelming force ? and that we use it fairly ?
the sooner they'll accept the situation."

 

 "Yes, sir." Strong signaled his analysts, and displays came to life on
the situation board. Simultaneously, the conference table was overhung
with a holographic relief map of central Kansas. The northerners looked
at the map and Strong almost smiled. They obviously had no idea the size
of the New Mexican operation. For months the Republic had been building
reserves along the Arkansas. It couldn't be entirely disguised; these
three had known something about the forces. But until the whole military
machine was in motion, its true size had escaped them. Strong was honest
with himself. It was not New Mexican cleverness that had outwitted
northern electronics. The plan could never have worked without advanced
countermeasures equipment ? some of it bough from the northerners
themselves.

 

 Computer-selected radio traffic became a background noise. He had
rehearsed all this with the technicians earlier; there was not a single
aspect of the operation that the President would miss. He pointed at the
map. "Colonel Alvarez has one armored force coming north from Old 70. It
should enter Manhattan from the east. The other force left here a few
minutes ago, and is approaching town along this secondary road." Tiny
silver lights crept along the map where he pointed. A few centimeters
above the display, other lights represented helicopter and fixed-wing
cover. These coasted gracefully back and forth, occasionally swooping
close to the surface.

 

 A voice spoke against a background of turbine noise, to announce no
resistance along the eastern salient. "Haven't really seen anyone.
People are staying indoors, or else bobbled up before we came in range.
We're avoiding houses and farm buildings, sticking to open fields and
roads."

 

 Strong expanded one of the views from the western salient. The
situation board showed a picture taken from the air. A dozen tanks moved
along a dirt road, trails of dust rising behind them. The camera chopper
must have been carrying a mike, for the rumbling and clanking of treads
replaced the radio traffic for a moment. Those tanks were the pride of
New Mexico. Unlike the aircraft, their hulls and engines were one
hundred percent Product of the Republic. New Mexico was poor in most
resources, but like Japan in the twentieth century, and Great Britain
before that, she was great in people, and ingenuity. Someday soon, she
would be great in electronics. For now, though, all the best
reconnaissance and communication gear came from Tinkers ? many in the
ungoverned lands. That was an Achilles' heel, long recognized by Strong
and others. It was the reason for using equipment from different
manufacturers all over the world, and for settling for second-class gear
in some of the most critical applications. How could they know, for
certain, that the equipment they bought was not booby-trapped or bugged?
There was historical precedent: The outcome of the Bobble War had been
due in large part to Tinker meddling with the old Peace Authority's
reconnaissance system.

 

 Strong recognized the stretch of road they were coming up on: a few
hundred meters beyond the lead tank lay an irregular blackened area and
the twisted metal that had once been a helicopter.

 

 A puff of smoke appeared by the lead tank, followed by the faint crack
of an explosion. Bill Alvarez's voice came on an instant after that.
"Under fire. Light mortar." The tank was moving again, but in a large
circle, toward the ditch. Guns and sensors on the other armor swung
north. "The enemy was lucky, or that was a smart round... We've got
radar backtrack. The round came from beyond the other side of the farm
we're passing. Looks like a tunnel entrance to the old Fort Riley ?
Wait, we got enemy radio traffic just before it happened."

 

 His voice was replaced by the crackling of high amplification. The new
voice was female, but barely understandable. "General van Steen to
forces [unintelligible]. You may fire when ready..." There was a
screaking sound and other voices.

 

 Strong saw Swensen's jaw sag in surprise, or horror.

 

 "General van Steen?"

 

 Colonel Alvarez's voice came back. "There were replies from several
points further north. The original launch site has fired two more
rounds." As he spoke, black smoke appeared near the treads of two more
tanks. Neither was destroyed, but neither could continue.

 

 "Mr. President, Mr. Strong, all rounds are coming from the same
location. These are barely more than fireworks except that they're
smart. I'll wager 'General van Steen' is some local gangster putting up
a brave front. We'll see in a minute." On the holomap, two blips drew
away from the other support aircraft and began a low level dash across
the miniature Kansas landscape.

 

 The President nodded, but addressed another unseen observer. "General
Crick?"

 

 "I concur, sir." Crick's voice was as loud and clear as

 

 Alvarez's, though the general was fifty kilometers to the east, at the
head of the column en route to Topeka. "But we've seen an armored
vehicle in the intermediate farmland, haven't we, Bill?"

 

 "Yes," said Alvarez. "It's been there for months. Looks like a hulk.
We'll take it out, too."

 

 Strong noticed the northerners tense. Swensen seemed on the verge of
screaming something. What dothey know?

 

 The attack planes, twin engine green-and-gray jobs, were on the main
view now. They were only twenty or thirty meters up, well below the
camera viewpoint, and probably not visible from the enemy launch site.
The lead craft angled slightly to the east, and spewed rockets at an
unmoving silhouette that was almost hidden by the hills and the corn. A
second later, the target disappeared in a satisfying geyser of flame and
dirt.

 

 ? and a second afterthat , hell on Earth erupted from the peaceful
fields: beams of pale light flashed from unseen projectors, and the
assault aircraft became falling, swelling balls of fire. As automatic
fire control brought the tanks' guns to bear on the source of the
destruction, rocket and laser fire came from other locations immediately
north of the roadway. Four of the tanks exploded immediately, and most
of the rest were on fire. Tiny figures struggled from their machines,
and ran from the flames.

 

 North of the farm, Strong thought he saw explosions at the source of
the original mortar attack. Something was firing in that direction, too!

 

 Then the camera chopper took a hit, and the picture swung round and
round, descending into the fire storm that stretched along the roadway.
The view went dark. Strong's carefully planned presentation was rapidly
degenerating into chaos. Alvarez was shouting over other voices,
demanding the reserves that still hung along Old 7O directly south of
Manhattan. And he could hear Crick working to divert portions of his air
cover to the fight that was developing.

 

 It wasn't till much later that Strong made sense of the conversation
that passed between the northerners just then:

 

 "Kiki, how could you!" Swensen slumped over the holomap, shaking his
head in despair (shame?).

 

 Brierson eyed the displays with no visible emotion. "What she did is
certainly legal, Al."

 

 "Sure it is. And immoral as hell. Poor Jake Schwartz. Poor Jake."

 

 The view of the battle scene reappeared. The picture was almost the
same perspective as before, but grainier and faintly wavering -probably
from a camera aboard some recon craft far south of the fighting. The
holomap flickered as major updates came in. The locals had been thorough
and successful. There were no effective New Mexican forces within five
kilometers of the original flareup. The force dug in to the farmland was
firing rockets southward, taking an increasing toll of the armored
reinforcements that were moving north from Old 70.

 

 "Crick here, Mr. President." The general's voice was bris.
professional. Any recriminations with Intelligence would come later.
"The enemy is localized, but incredibly well dug in. If he's isolated,
we might be able to bypass him, but neither Alvarez nor I want something
like that left on our flank We're going to soften him up, then move our
armor right i< on top."

 

 Strong nodded to himself. In any case, they had to take this strong
point just to find out what the enemy really had. In the air over the
holomap, dozens of lights moved toward the enemy fortress. Some flew
free ballistic arcs, while others stuck close to the ground, out of the
enemy's direct fire. Across the table, the holo lit the northerners'
faces: Swensen's even more pale than before, Brierson's dark and stolid.
There was a faint stench of sweat in the air now, barely perceptible
against the stronger smells of metal and fresh plastic.

 

 Damn.Those three had been surprised by the ambush -but Strong was
sure that they understood what was behind the attack, and whence the
next such would come. Given time and Special Service drugs, he could
have the answers. He leaned across the table and addressed the MSP
officer. "So. You aren't entirely bluff. But unless you have many more
such traps, you won't do more than slow us up ? and kill a lot of people
on both sides."

 

 Swensen was about to answer, then looked at Brierson and was silent.
The black seemed to be deliberating just what or how much to say;
finally, he shrugged. "I won't lie to you. The attack had nothing to do
with MSP forces."

 

 "Some other gang then?"

 

 "No. You just happened to run into a farmer who defends his property."

 

 "Bull." Ed Strong had spent his time in the military ? in combat along
the Colorado. He knew how to read the intelligence displays and manage
tactics. But he also knew what it was like to be on the ground where the
reality was bullets and shrapnel. He knew what it took to set up a
defense like the one they had just seen. "Mr. Brierson, you're telling
me one man could afford to buy the sort of equipment we saw and to dig
it in so deep that even now we don't have a clear picture of his set-up?
You're telling me that one man could afford an MHD source for those lasers?"

 

 "Sure. That family has probably been working at this for years,
spending every spare gAu on the project, building the system up little
by little. Even so," he sighed, "they should be out of rockets and juice
soon. You could lay off."

 

 The rain of rocket-borne and artillery high explosives was beginning to
fall upon the target. Flashes and color sparkled across the screen, more
an abstract pattern than a landscape now. There was no human life, no
equipment visible. The bombers were standing off and lobbing their cargo
in. Until the enemy's defenses were broken, any other course was
needless waste. After a couple minutes, the airborne debris obscured all
but the largest detonations. Napalm flared within, and the whole cloud
glowed beautiful yellow. For a few seconds, the enemy lasers still
flashed, spectacular and ineffective in all the dirt. Even after the
lasers died, the holomap showed isolated missiles emerging from the
target area to hunt for the bombers. Then even those stopped coming.

 

 Still the barrage continued, raising the darkness and light high over
the Kansas fields. There was no sound from this display, but
thethudthudding of the attack came barely muffled through the hull of
the C&C van -they were, after all, less than seven thousand meters from
the scene. It was mildly surprising that the enemy had not tried to take
them out. Perhaps Brierson was more important ? and more
knowledgeable-than he admitted.

 

 Minutes passed, and they all ? President and gangsters alike -watched
the barrage end and the wind push the haze away from the devastation
that modern war can make. North and east, fires spread through the
fields. The tanks ? and final, physical possession of the disputed
territory ? were only minutes away.

 

 The destruction was not uniform. New Mexican fire had focused on the
projectors and rocket launchers ? and there the ground was pulverized,
ripped first by proximity-fused high explosives, then by digger bombs
and napalm. As they watched, recon craft swooped low over the landscape,
their multiscanners searching for any enemy weapons that might be held
in reserve. When the tanks and personnel carriers arrived, a more
thorough search would be made on foot.

 

 Finally, Strong returned to Brierson's fantastic claim. "And you say
it's just coincidence that this one farmer who spends all his money on
weapons happens to be on our line of march."

 

 "Coincidence and a little help from... General van Steen."

 

 President Martinez raised his eyes from the displays at his end. His
voice was level, but Strong recognized the tension there. "Mr., uh,
Brierson. just how many of these miniforts are there?"

 

 The other sat back. His words might have seemed insolent, but there was
no sarcasm in his voice. "I have no idea, Mr. Martinez. As long as they
don't bother our customers, they are of no interest to MSP Many aren't
as well hidden as Schwartz, but you can't count on that. As long as you
stay off their property, most of them won't touch you."

 

 "You're saying that if we detect and avoid them, they are no threat to
our plans?"

 

 "Yes."

 

 The main screen showed the tank forces now. They were a few hundred of
meters from the burning fields. The viewpoint rotated and Strong saw
that Crick had not stinted: at least one hundred tanks - most of the
reserve force - were advancing on a five thousand meter front. Following
were even more personnel carriers. Tactical air support was heavy. Any
fire from the ground ahead would be met by immediate destruction. The
camera rotated back to show the desolation they were moving into. Strong
doubted that anything living, much less anything hostile, still existed
in that moonscape.

 

 The President didn't seem interested in the display. All his attention
was on the northerner. "So we can avoid these stationary gunmen till we
find it convenient to deal with them. You are a great puzzle, Mr.
Brierson. You claim strengths and weaknesses for your people that are
equally incredible. And I get the feeling you don't really expect us to
believe you, but that somehow you believe everything you're saying."

 

 "You're very perceptive. I've thought of trying to bluff you. In fact,
I did try earlier today. From the looks of your equipment," He waved his
hand at the Command and Control consoles, a faintly mocking smile on his
face, "we might even be able to bluff you back where you belong. Thisonce.

 

 But when you saw what we had done, you'd be back again next year, next
decade ? and we'd have to do it all over again without the bluffs. So,
Mr. Martinez, I think it best you learn what you're up against the first
time out. People like Schwartz are just the beginning. Even if you can
rub out them and services like MSP, you'll end up with a guerrilla war
like you've never fought ? one that can actually turn your own people
against you... You do practice conscription, don't you?"

 

 The President's face hardened, and Strong knew that the northerner had
gone too far. "We do, as has every free nation in history ? or at least
every nation that was determined to stay free. If you're implying that
our people would desert under fire or because of propaganda, you are
contradicting my personal experience." He turned away, dismissing
Brierson from his attention.

 

 "They've arrived, sir." As the tanks rolled into position on the
smoking hillsides, the personnel carriers began disgorging infantry. The
tiny figures moved quickly, dragging gear toward the open tears in the
earth. Strong could hear an occasional popping sound: Misfiring engines?
Remnant ammo?

 

 Tactical aircraft swept back and forth overhead, their rockets and guns
ready to support the troopers on the ground. The techs' reports trickled in.

 

 "Three video hard points detected... " Small arms fire chattered. "Two
destroyed, one recovered... Sonoprobes show lots of tunnels. Electrical
activity at... " The men in the picture looked up, at something out of view.

 

 Nothing else changed on the picture, but the radars saw the intrusion,
and the holomap showed the composite analysis: a mote of light rose
leisurely out of the map, five hundred meters, six hundred. It moved
straight up, slowed. The support aircraft swooped down upon it and a
purple flash, bright yet soundless, seemed to go offinside Strong's
head. The holomap and the displays winked down to nothing, then came
back. The President's image reappeared but there was no sound, and it
was clear he was not receiving.

 

 Along the length of the van, clerks and analysts came out of that
stunned moment to work frantically with their equipment. Acrid smoke
drifted into the conference area. The safe, crisp displays had been
replaced by immediate, deadly reality.

 

 "High flux nuke." The voice was calm, almost mechanical,

 

 High flux nuke. Radiation bomb.Strong came to his feet, rage and
horror burning inside him. Except for bombs in lapsed bobbles, no
nuclear weapon had exploded in North America in nearly eighty years.
Even during the bitterest years of the Water Wars, both Aztlan and New
Mexico had seen the suicide implicit in nuclear solutions. But here, in
a rich land, without warning and for no real reason ?

 

 "You animals!"he spat down upon the seated northerners.

 

 Swensen lunged forward. "God damn it! Schwartz isn't one of my customers!"

 

 Then the shock wave hit. Strong was thrown across the map, his face
buried in the glowing terrain. Just as suddenly he was thrown back. The
prisoners' guard had been knocked into the far wall; now he stumbled
forward through Martinez's unseeing image, his stun gun flying from his
hand.

 

 From the moment of the detonation, Brierson had sat hunched, his arms
extended under the table. Now he moved, lunging across the table to
sweep up the gun between his manacled hands. The muzzle sparkled and
Strong's face went numb. He watched in horror as the other twisted and
raked the length of the van with stunfire. The men back there had
themselves been knocked about. Several were just coming up off their
knees. Most didn't know what hit them when they collapsed back to the
floor. At the far end of the van, one man had kept his head. One man had
been as ready as Brierson: Bill Alvarez popped up from behind an array
processor, a five-millimeter slug gun in his hand, flashing fire as he
moved. Then the numbness seemed to squeeze in on Strong's mind, and
everything went gray.

 

 Wil looked down the dim corridor that ran the length of the command
van. No one was moving, though a couple men were snoring. The officer
with the handgun had collapsed, his hands hanging limp just a few
centimeters from his pistol. Blue sky showing through the wall above
Wil's head was evidence of the fellow's determination; if the other had
been a hair faster...

 

 Wil handed the stun gun to Big Al. "Let Jim go down and pick up the
slug gun. Give an extra dose to anyone who looks suspicious."

 

 Al nodded, but there was still a dazed looked in his eyes. In the last
hour his world had been turned upside down. How marry of his
customers-the people who paid for his protection ? had been killed? Wil
tried not to think about that; indirectly those same people had been
depending on MSP Almost tripping on his fetters, he stepped over the
fallen guard and sat down on the nearest technician's saddle. For all
New Mexico being a foreign land, the controls were familiar. It wasn't
too surprising. The New Mexicans used a lot o f Tinker electronics ?
though they didn't seem trust it: much of the equipment's performance
was degraded where they had replaced suspicious components with their
own devices. Ah, the price of paranoia.

 

 Brierson picked up a command mike, made a simple request, and watched
the answer parade across the console. "Hey, Al, we stopped transmitting
right at the detonation!" Brierson quickly entered commands that cleared
Martinez's image and blocked any future transmissions. Then he asked for
status.

 

 The air-conditioning was down, but internal power could keep the gear
going for a time. The van's intelligence unit estimated the nuke had
been a three kiloton equivalent with a seventy percent radiance.
Brierson felt his stomach flip-flop. He knew about nukes ? perhaps more
than the New Mexicans. There was no legal service that allowed them and
it was open season on armadillos who advertised having them, but every
so often MSP got a case involving such weapons. Everyone within two
thousand meters of that blast would already be dead. Schwartz's private
war had wiped out a significant part of the invading forces.

 

 The people in the van had received a sizable dose from the Schwartz
nuke ? though it wouldn't be life-shortening if they got medical
treatment soon. In the division command area immediately around the van,
the exposure was somewhat higher. How long would it be before those
troops came nosing around the silent command vehicle? If he could get a
phone call out -

 

 But then there was Fate's personal vendetta against W. W. Brierson:
Loud pounding sounded at the forward door. Wil waved Jim and Al to be
quiet. Awkwardly, he got off the saddle and moved to look through the
old-fashioned viewplate mounted next to the door: In the distance he
could see men carrying stretchers from. an ambulance; some of the burn
cases would be really bad. Five troopers were standing right at the
doorway, close enough that he could see blistered skin and burned
clothing. But their weapons looked fine, and the wiry noncom pounding on
the door was alert and energetic. "Hey, open up in there!"

 

 Wil thought fast. What was the name of that vip civilian? Then he
shouted back (doing his best to imitate the clipped New Mexican accent),
"Sorry. Mr. Strong doesn't want to breach internal atmosphere."
Praythey don't see the bullet hole just around the corner.

 

 He saw the sergeant turn away from the door. Wil lip-read the word
shit. He could almost read the noncom's mind: the men outside had come
near to being french-fried, and here some silkshirt supervisor was
worried about so-far-nonexistent fallout.

 

 The noncom turned back to the van and shouted, "How about casualties?"

 

 "Outside of rod exposure, just some bloody noses and loose teeth. Main
power is down and we can't transmit," Wil replied.

 

 "Yessir. Your node has been dropped from the network. We've patched
backward to Oklahoma Leader and forward to div mobile. Oklahoma Leader
wants to talk to Mr. Strong. Div mobile wants to talk to Colonel
Alvarez. How long will it be till you're back on the air?"

 

 How long can 1 ask for? How long do 1 need?"Give us fifteen minutes,"
he shouted, after a moment.

 

 "Yes, sir. We'll get back to you." Having innocently delivered this
threat, the sergeant and his troopers moved off.

 

 Brierson hopped back to the console. "Keep your eyes on the sleepers,
Al. If I'm lucky, fifteen minutes should be enough time."

 

 "To do what? Call MSP?"

 

 "Something better. Something I should have done this morning." He
searched through the command menus for satellite pickups. The New
Mexican military was apparently leery of using subscription services,
but there should be some facility for it... Ah, there it was. Brierson
phased the transmitter for the synchronous satellite the Hainan commune
had hung over Brazil. With narrow beam, he might to be able to talk
through it without the New Mexicans realizing he was transmitting. He
tapped in a credit number, then a destination code.

 

 The display showed the call had reached Whidbey Island. Seconds passed.
Outside, he could hear choppers moving into the camp. More
ambulances?Damn you, Rober. Be home.

 

 The conference area. filled with bluish haze, then became a sunlit
porch overlooking a wooded bay. Sounds of laughter and splashing came
faintly from the water. Old Roberto Richardson never used less than full
holo. But the scene was pale, almost ghostly ? the best the van's
internal power supply could do. A heavy-set man with apparent age around
thirty came up the steps onto the porch and sat down; it was Richardson.
He peered out at them. "Wil? Is that you?"

 

 If it weren't for the stale air and the dimness of the vision, Wil
could almost believe he'd been transported halfway across the continent.
Richardson lived on an estate that covered the whole of Whidbey Island.
In the Pacific time zone it was still morning, and shadows swept across
lawn-like spaces that stretched away to his manicured forests. Not for
the first time, Wil was reminded of the faerie landscapes of Maxfield
Parrish. Roberto Richardson was one of the richest men in the world; he
sold a line of products which many people can not resist. He was rich
enough to live in whatever fantasy world he chose.

 

 Brierson turned on the pickup that watched the conference table.

 

 "Dios. It is you, Wil! I thought you were dead or captured."

 

 "Neither just yet. You're following this ruckus?"

 

 "Por cierto. And most news services are covering it ? I wager they're
spending more money than your blessed Michigan State Police on this war.
Unless that nuke was one of yours? Wili, my boy, that was spectacular.
You took out twenty percent of their armor."

 

 "It wasn't one of ours, Rober."

 

 "Ah. Just as well. Midwest jurisprudence would withdraw service for
something like that."

 

 Time was short, but Wil couldn't resist asking, "What is MSP up to?"

 

 Richardson sighed. "About what I'd expect. They've finally brought some
aircraft in. They're buzzing around the tip of Dave Crick's salient. The
Springfield Cyborg Club has gone after the New Mexican supply lines.
They are causing some damage. A cyborg is a bit hard to kill, and
Norcross Security is supplying them with transports and weapons. The New
Mexicans have Wachendon suppressors down to battalion level, so there's
no bobbling. The fighting looks quite twentieth century.

 

 "You've got a lot of public opinion behind you ? even in the Republic,
I think ? but not much firepower.

 

 "You know, Wil, you fellows should have bought more from me. You saved
a few million, maybe, passing up those aerial torpedoes and assault
craft, and the tanks. But look where you are now. If?"

 

 "Jesus, that's Rober Richardson!" It was Big Al; he had been watching
the holo with growing wonder.

 

 Richardson squinted at his display. "I can hardly see anything on this,
Wil. Where in perdition are you calling from? And to you, UnseenSir,
it's Roberto Richardson ."

 

 Big Al walked toward the sunlit porch. He got within an apparent two
meters of Richardson before he banged into the conference table. "You're
the sort of scum who's responsible for this! You sold the New Mexicans
everything they couldn't build themselves: the high performance
aircraft, the military electronics." Al waved at the cabinets in the
darkened van. What he claimed was largely true. Wil had noticed the
equipment stenciled with Richardson's logo, "USAF Inc ? Sellers of Fine
Weapon Systems for More than Twenty Years"; the New Mexicans hadn't even
bothered to paint it out. Roberto had started out as a minor Aztlan
nobleman. He'd been in just the right place at the time of the Bobble
War, and had ended up controlling the huge munition dumps left by the
old Peace Authority. That had been the beginning of his fortune. Since
then, he had moved into the ungoverned lands, and begun manufacturing
much of his own equipment. The heavy industry he had brought to Bellevue
was almost on the scale of the twentieth century -or of modern New Mexico.

 

 Richardson came half out of his chair and chopped at the air in front
of him. "See here. I have to take enough such insults from my niece and
her grandchildren. I don't have to take them from a stranger." He stood,
tossed his display flat on the chair, and walked to the steps that led
down to his shaded river.

 

 "Wait, Rober!" shouted Brierson. He waved Big Al back to the depths of
the van. "I didn't call to pass on insults. You wondered where I'm
calling from. Well, let me tell you ?"

 

 By the time he finished, the old gunrunner had returned to his seat. He
started to laugh. "I should have guessed you'd end up talking right out
of the lion's mouth." His laughter halted abruptly. "But you're trapped,
aren't you? No last minute Brierson tricks to get out of this one? I'm
sorry, Wil, I really am. If there were anything I could do, I would. I
don't forget my debts."

 

 Those were the words Wil had been hoping to hear. "There's nothing you
can do for me, Rober. Our bluff in this van is good for just a few
minutes. But... we could all use a little charity just now."

 

 The other looked nonplussed.

 

 "Look, I'll bet you have plenty of aircraft and armor going through
final checkout at the Bellevue plant. And I know you have ammunition
stocks. Between MSP and Justice Inc and a few other police services, we
have enough war buffs to man them. At least we have enough to make these
New Mexicans think twice."

 

 But Richardson was shaking his head. "I'm a charitable man, Wil. If I
had such things to loan, MSP could have some for the asking... But you
see, we've all been a bit outsmarted here. The New Mexicans ? and people
I now think are fronting for them ? have options on the next four months
of my production. You see what I mean? It's one thing to help people I
like, and another to break a contract ? especially when reliability has
always been one of my most important selling points."

 

 Wil nodded. So much for that brilliant idea.

 

 "And it may turn out for the best, Wil," Richardson continued quietly.
"I know your loudmouthed friend won't believe this coming from me, but ?
I think the Midwest might now be best off not to fight. We both know the
invasion can't stick, not in the long run. It's just a question of how
many lives and how much property is going to be destroyed in the
meantime... and how much ill-feeling is going to be stored up for the
future. Those New Mexicans deserve to get nuked and all the rest, but
that could steel them for a holy war -like they've been fighting along
the Colorado for so long On the other hand, if you let them come in and
take a whack at 'governing' ? why in twenty years you'll have them
converted into happy anarchists."

 

 Wil smiled in spite of himself. Richardson was certainly the prime
example of what he was talking about. Wil knew the old autocrat had
originally been an agent of Aztlan sent to prepare the Northwest for
invasion. "Okay, Rober. I'll think about it. Thanks for talking."

 

 Richardson seemed to have guessed Wil's phantom position on his porch.
His dark eyes stared intensely into Wil's. "Take care of yourself, Wili."

 

 The cool, northern playground wavered for a second, like a dream of
paradise ? then vanished, replaced by the hard reality of dark plastic,
glimmering displays, and unconscious New Mexicans.What now,
Lieutenant? Calling Rober had been his only real idea. He could call
MSP, but he had nothing helpful to tell them. He leaned on the console,
his hands sliding slickly across his sweaty face. Why not just do as
Rober suggested? Give up and let the tide of history take care of things.

 

 No. Lots of people talk about the "inevitable tide of history."
Brierson couldn't imagine such a thing, except as it might exist in the
determination and imagination of individuals. Government had been a
human institution for thousands of years; there was no reason to believe
the Republic of New Mexico would fall apart by itself. Their actions had
to be shown to be impractically expensive.

 

 And there was another, more personal, reason. Richardson talked as
though this invasion were something special, something that transcended
commerce and courts and contracts. That was wrong. Except for their
power ? and their self-righteousness -the New Mexicans were no different
from some chopper gang marauding MSP customers. And if he and MSP let
them take over, it would be just as much a default. As with Rober,
reliability was one of MSP's strongest selling points.

 

 So MSP had to keep fighting. The only question was, what could he and
Al and Jim do now?

 

 Wil twisted around to look at the exterior view mounted by the hatch.
It was a typically crass design flaw that the view was independent of
the van's computers and couldn't be displayed except at the doorway.

 

 There wasn't much to see. The division HQ was dispersed, and the van
itself sat in the bottom of a ravine. The predominant impression was of
smoking foliage and yellow limestone. He heard the keening of light
turbines. Oh boy. Three overland cars were coming their way. He
recognized the sergeant he had talked to a few minutes earlier. If there
was anything left to do, he'd better do it now.

 

 He glanced around the van. Strong was a high presidential advisor. Was
that worth anything? Wil tried to remember. In Aztlan, with its feudal
setup, such a man might be very important. The safety of just a few
leaders was the whole purpose of that government. The New Mexicans were
different. Their rulers were elected; there were clear laws of
succession, and people like Strong were probably expendable. Still,
there was an idea here: such a state was something like an enormous
corporation, with the citizens as stockholders. The analogy wasn't
perfect ? no corporation could use the coercion these people practiced
on their own. And there were other differences. But still. If the top
people in such an enormous organization were threatened, it would be
enormously more effective than if ? say ? the board of directors of MSP
were hassled. There were at least ten police services as powerful as MSP
in the ungoverned lands, and many of them subcontracted to smaller firms.

 

 The question, then, was how to get their hands on someone like Hastings
Martinez or this General Crick. He punched up an aerial view from
somewhere south of the combat area. A train of clouds had spread
southeast from the Schwartz farm. Otherwise the air was faintly hazy.
Thunderheads hung at the northern horizon. The sky had that familiar
feel to it. Topeka Met Service confirmed the feeling: this was tornado
weather.

 

 Brierson grimaced. He had known that all day. And somewhere in the back
of his mind, there had been the wild hope that the tornados would pick
the right people to land on, Which was absurd: modern science could kill
tornados, but no one could direct them.Modern science can kill
tornados . He swallowed. There was something he could do ? if there was
time. One call to headquarters was all he needed.

 

 Outside, there was pounding on the door and shouting. More ominous, he
heard a scrabbling noise and the van swayed slightly on its suspension:
someone was climbing onto the roof. Wil ignored the footsteps above him,
and asked the satellite link for a connection to MSP The blue and gold
Michigan State logo had just appeared when the screen went dead. Wil
tapped futilely at emergency codes, then looked at the exterior view
again. A hard-faced major was standing next to the van.

 

 Wil turned on the audio and interrupted the other. "We just got sound
working here, Major. What's up?"

 

 This stopped the New Mexican, who had been half-way through shouting
his message at them. The ofcer stepped back from the van and continued
in more moderate tones. "I was saying there's no fallout problem."
Behind him, one of the troopers was quietly barfing into the bushes.
There might be no fallout, but unless the major and his men got medical
treatment soon, they would be very sick soldiers. "There's no need for
you to stay buttoned up."

 

 "Major, we're just about ready to go back on the air. I don't want to
take any chances."

 

 "Who am I speaking to?"

 

 "Ed Strong. Special Advisor to the President," Wil spoke the words with
the same ponderous importance the real Ed Strong might have used.

 

 "Yes, sir. May I speak with Colonel Alvarez?"

 

 "Alvarez?" Now that was a man the major must know. "Sorry, he got the
corner of an equipment cabinet in the head. He hasn't come to yet."

 

 The officer turned and gave the sergeant a sidelong look. The noncom
shook his head slightly. "I see." And Wil was afraid that he really did.
The major's mouth settled into a thin line. He said something to the
noncom, then walked back to the cars.

 

 Wil turned back to the other displays. It was a matter of seconds now.
That major was more than suspicious. And without the satellite
transmitter, Brierson didn't have a chance of reaching East Lansing or
even using the loudmouth channels. The only comm links he had that
didn't go through enemy nodes were the local phone bands. He could just
reach Topeka Met. They would understand what he was talking about. Even
if they wouldn't cooperate, they would surely pass the message back to
headquarters. He ran the local directory. A second passed and he was
looking at a narrowband black and white image. A young, good-looking
male sat behind an executive-sized desk. He smiled dazzlingly and said,
"Topeka Meteorological Service, Customer Relations. May I help you?"

 

 "I sure hope so. My name's Brierson, Michigan State Police." Wil found
the words tumbling out, as if he had been rehearsing this little speech
for hours. The idea was simple, but there were some details. When he
finished, he noticed the major coming back toward the van. One of his
men carried comm gear.

 

 The receptionist at Topeka Met frowned delicately. "Are you one our
customers, sir?"

 

 "No, damn it. Don't you watch the news? You got four hundred tanks
coming down Old 70 toward Topeka. You're being invaded, man ? as
ingoing out of business !"

 

 The young man shrugged in a way that indicated he never bothered with
the news. "A gang invading Topeka? Sir, we are a city, not some farm
community. In any case, what you want us to do with our tornado killers
is clearly improper. It would be ?"

 

 "Listen," Wil interrupted, his voice placating, almost frightened. "At
least send this message on to the Michigan State Police. Okay?"

 

 The other smiled the same dazzling, friendly smile that had opened the
conversation. "Certainly, sir." And Wil realized he had lost. He was
talking to a moron or a low-grade personality simulator, it didn't
matter much which. Topeka Met was like a lot of companies ? it operated
with just enough efficiency to stay in business. Damn the luck.

 

 The voices from the exterior pickup were faint but clear, " ?whoever
they are, they're transmitting over the local phone bands, sir." It was
an enlisted man talking to the New Mexican major. The major nodded and
stepped toward the van.

 

 This was it. No time left to think. Wil stabbed blindly at the
directory. The Topeka Met Customer Relations "expert" disappeared and
the screen began blinking a ring pattern.

 

 "All right, Mr. Strong," the major was shouting again, loudly enough so
that he could be heard through the hull of the van as well as over the
pickup. The officer held a communications headset. "The President is on
this line, sir. He wishes to speak with you... right now." There was a
grim smile on the New Mexican's face.

 

 Wil's fingers flick across the control board; the van's exterior mike
gave a loud squawk and was silent. With one part of his mind, he heard
the enlisted man say, "They're still transmitting, Major."

 

 And then the ring pattern vanished from the phone display. Last chance.
Even an auto answerer might be enough. The screen lit up, and Wil found
himself staring at ? a five year-old girl.

 

 "Trask residence," she looked a little intimidated by Wil's hulking,
scowling image. But she spoke clearly, as one who has been coached in
the proper response to strangers. Those serious brown eyes reminded
Brierson of his own sister. Bounded by what she knew and what she
understood, she would try to do what was right.

 

 It took a great effort to relax his face and smile at the girl. "Hello.
Do you know how to record my call, Miss?"

 

 She nodded.

 

 "Would you do that and show it to your parents, please?"

 

 "Okay." She reached offscreen. The recording telltale gleamed at the
corner of the flat, and Wil began talking. Fast.

 

 The major's voice came over the external pickup: "Open it up,
Sergeant." There were quick footsteps and something slapped against the
hatch.

 

 "Will" Big Al grabbed his shoulder. "Get down. Away from the hatch.
Those are slug guns they have out there!"

 

 But Brierson couldn't stop now. He pushed Al away, waved for him to get
down among the fallen New Mexicans.

 

 The explosion was a sharp cracking sound that rocked the van sideways.
The phone connection held, and Wil kept talking. Then the door fell ? or
was pulled ? outward and daylight splashed across him.

 

 "Get away from that phone!"

 

 On the display, the little girl seemed to look past Wil. Her eyes
widened. She was the last thing W. W. Brierson saw.

 

 There were dreams. In some he could only see. In others, he was blind,
yet hearing and smell were present, all mixed together. And some were
pure pain, winding up and up while all around him torturers twisted
screws and needles to squeeze the last bit of hurt from his shredded
flesh. But he also sensed his parents and sister Beth, quiet and near.
And sometimes when he could see and the pain was gone, there were
flowers ? almost a jungle of them ? dipping near his eyes, smelling of
violin music.

 

 Snow. Smooth, pristine, as far as his eyes could see. Trees glazed in
ice that sparkled against cloudless blue sky. Wil raised his hand to rub
his eyes and felt faint surprise to see the hand obey, to feel hand
touch face as he willed it.

 

 "Wili, Wili! You're really back!" Someone warm and dark rushed in from
the side. Tiny arms laced around his neck. "We knew you'd come back. But
it's been so long." His five year-old sister snuggled her face against him.

 

 As he lowered his arm to pat her head, a technician came around from
behind him. "Wait a minute, honey. Just because his eyes are open
doesn't mean he's back. We've gotten that far before." Then he saw the
grin on Wil's face, and his eyes widened a bit. "L-Lieutenant Brierson!
Can you understand me?" Wil nodded, and the tech glanced over his head ?
probably at some diagnostic display. Then he smiled, too. "You do
understand me! Just a minute, I'm going to get my supervisor. Don't
touch anything." He rushed out of the room, his last words more an
unbelieving mumbling to himself than anything else: "I was beginning to
wonder if we'd ever get past protocol rejection."

 

 Beth Brierson looked up at her brother. "Are you okay, now, Wili?"

 

 Wil wiggled his toes, andfelt them wiggle. He certainly felt okay. He
nodded. Beth stepped back from the bed. "I want to go get Mom and Dad."

 

 Wil smiled again. "I'll be right here waiting."

 

 Then she was gone, too. Brierson glanced around the room and recognized
the locale of several of his nightmares.

 

 But it was an ordinary hospital room, perhaps a little heavy on
electronics.

 

 ... and still he was not alone in it. Alvin Swensen, dressed as
offensively as ever, sat in the shadows next to the window. Now he stood
up and crossed the room to shake hands.

 

 Wil grunted. "My own parents aren't here to greet me, yet Big Al is."

 

 "Your bad luck. If you'd had the courtesy to come around the first time
they tried to bring you back, you would have

 

 had your family, and half MSP waiting for you. You were a hero."

 

 "Were?"

 

 "Oh, you still are, Wil. But it's been a while, you know." There was a
crooked smile on his face.

 

 Brierson looked through the window at the bright winter's day. The land
was familiar. He was back in Michigan, probably at Okemos Central
Medical. But Beth didn't look much older. "Around six months, I'd guess."

 

 Big Al nodded. "And, no, I haven't been sitting here every day watching
your face for some sign of life. I happened to be in East Lansing today.
My Protection Racket still has some insurance claims against your
company. MSP paid off all the big items quick, but some of the little
things ? bullet holes in outbuildings, stuff like that ? they're
dragging their heels

 

 on. Anyway, I thought I'd drop by and... see how you're doing."

 

 "Hmm. So you're not saluting the New Mexican flag down there in Manhattan?"

 

 "What? Hell no, we're not!" Then Al seemed to remember who he was
talking to. "Look, Wil, in a few minutes you're gonna have the medical
staff in here patting themselves on the back for pulling off another
medical miracle, and your

 

 family will be right on top of that. And after that, your Colonel Potts
will fill you in again on everything that's happened. Do you really want
Al Swensen s Three Minute History of the Great Plains War?"

 

 Wil nodded.

 

 "Okay." Big Al moved his chair close to the bed. "The New Mexicans
pulled back from the ungoverned lands less than three days after they
grabbed you and me and Jim Turner..." The official Republic view was
that the Great plains Action was a victory for the decisive and
restrained use of military force. The "roving gangster bands" of the
ungoverned wastes had been punished for their abuse of New Mexican
settlers, and one W. W. Brierson, the ringleader of the northern
criminals, had been killed.

 

 "I'm dead?" said Wil.

 

 "Dead enough for their purposes." Big Al seemed momentarily uneasy. "I
don't know whether I should tell a sick man how much sicker he once was
? but you got hit in the back of the head with a five-millimeter
exploder. The Newmex didn't hurt me or Jim, so I don't think it was
vengeance. But when they blew in the door, there you were, doing
something with their command equipment. They were already hurting, and
they didn't have any stun guns, I guess."

 

 A five-millimeter exploder. Wil knew what they could do. He should be
dead. If it hit near the neck, there might be some forebrain tissue
left, but the front of his face would have been blown out. He touched
his nose wonderingly.

 

 Al saw the motion. "Don't worry. You're as beautiful as ever. But at
the time, you looked very dead ? even to their best medics. They popped
you into stasis. The three of us spent nearly a month in detention in
Oklahoma. When we were 'repatriated,' the people at Okemos Central
didn't have any trouble growing back the front of your face. Maybe even
the New Mexicans could do that. The problem is, you're missing a chunk
of brain," he made patted the back of his head.*"That* they couldn't
grow back. So they replaced it with processing equipment, and tried to
interface that with what was left."

 

 Wil experienced a sudden, chilling moment of introspection. He really
should be dead. Could this all be in the imagination of some damned
prosthesis program?

 

 Al saw his face, and looked stricken. "Honest, Wil, it wasn't*that*
large a piece. Just big enough to fool those dumbass New Mexicans."

 

 The moment passed and Brierson almost chuckled. If self-awareness were
suspect, there could scarcely be certainty of anything.

 

 "Okay. So the New Mexican incursion was a great success. Now tell me
why they really left. Was it simply the Schwartz bomb?"

 

 "I think that was part of it." Even with the nuke, the casualties had
not been high. Only the troops and tankers within three or four thousand
meters of the blast were killed ? perhaps twenty-five hundred men. This
was enormous by the standards Wil was used to, but not by the measure of
the Water Wars. Overall, the New Mexicans could claim that it had been
an "inexpensive" action.

 

 But the evidence of casual acceptance of nuclear warfare, all the way
down to the level of an ordinary farmer, was terrifying to the New
Mexican brass. Annexing the Midwest would be like running a gradeschool
where the kids carry slug guns. They probably didn't realize that
Schwartz would have been lynched the first time he stepped off his
property if his neighbors had realized beforehand that he was nuke-armed.

 

 "But I think your little phone call was just as important."

 

 "About using the tornado killers?"

 

 "Yeah. It's one thing to step on a rattlesnake ? and another to
suddenly realize you're up to your ankles in 'em. I bet the weather
services have equipped hundreds of farms with killers ? all the way from
Okemos to Greeley." And, as Wil had realized on that summer day when
last he was truly conscious, a tornado killer is essentially an aerial
torpedo. Their use was coordinated by the meteorological companies,
which paid individual farmers to house them. During severe weather
alerts, coordinating processors at a met service headquarters monitored
remote sensors, and launched killers from appropriate points in the
countryside. Normally, they would be airborne for minutes, but they
could loiter for hours. When remote sensing found a twister, the killers
came in at the top of the funnel, generated a fifty-meter bobble ? and
destabilized the vortex.

 

 Take that loiter capability, make trivial changes in the flight
software ? and you have a weapon capable of flying hundreds of
kilometers and delivering a one tonne payload with pinpoint accuracy.
"Even without nukes they're pretty fearsome. Especially if used like you
suggested."

 

 Wil shrugged. Actually, the target he had suggested was the usual one
when dealing with marauding gangs. Only the scale was different.

 

 "You know the Trasks ? that family you called right at the end? Bill
Trask's brother rents space for three killers to Topeka Met. They stole
one of them and did just like you said. The news services had spotted
Martinez's location; the Trasks flew the killer right into the roof of
the mansion he and his staff were using down in Oklahoma. We got
satellite pics of what happened. Those New Mexican big shots came
storming out of there like ants in a meth fire." Even now, months later,
the memory made Big Al laugh. "Bill Trask told me he painted something
like 'Hey, hey Hastings, the next one is for real!' on the fuselage. I
bet even yet, their top people are living under concrete, wondering
whether to keep their bobble suppressors up or down.

 

 "But they got the message. Inside of twelve hours, their troops were
moving back south and they were starting to talk about their
statesmanship and the lesson they had taught..."

 

 Wil started to laugh, too. The room shimmered colorfully in time with
his laughter. It was not painful, but it was disconcerting enough to
make him stop. "Good. So we didn't need those bums from Topeka Met."

 

 "Right. Fact is, they had me arrest the Trasks for theft. But when they
finally got their corporate head out of the dirt, they dropped charges
and tried to pretend it had been their idea all along. Now they're
modifying their killers and selling the emergency control rights."

 

 Far away (he remembered the long hallways at Okemos Central), he heard
voices. And none familiar. Damn. The medics were going to get to him
before his family. Big Al heard the commotion, too. He stuck his head
out the door, then said to Wil, "Well, Lieutenant, this is where I
dessert, You know the short version, anyway." He walked across the room
to pick up his data set.

 

 Wil followed him with his eyes. "So it all ended for the best,
except..."except for all those poor New Mexican souls caught under a
light brighter than any Kansas sun, except for ...

 

 Kiki and Schwartz. I wish they could know how thing turned out."

 

 Big Al stopped halfway to the door, a surprised look on his face. "Kiki
and Jake? One is too smart to die and the other is too mean! She knew
Jake would thump her for bringing the New Mexicans across his land. She
and my boys were way underground long before he wiped off: And Jake was
dug in even deeper.

 

 "Hell, Wil, they're even bigger celebrities than you are! Old Jake has
become the Midwest's pop armadillo. None of us ever guessed, least of
all him: heenjoys being a public person. He and Kiki have buried the
hatchet. Now they're talking about a world-wide club for armadillos.
They figure if one can stop an entire nation state, what can a bunch of
them do? You know: 'Make the world safe for the ungoverned.'"

 

 Then he was gone. Wil had just a moment to chew on the problems van
Steen and Schwartz would cause the Michigan State Police before the
triumphant med techs crowded into his room.

 


     END INTERLUDE


     


     

