World with no name.

Green it was.

Green and gravid.

It lay supine in a sea of sibilant Jet, a festering
emerald in the universe—ocean. It did not support
life. Rather, on its surface life exploded, erupted, mul-
tiplied, and thrived beyond imagining. From a soil
base so rich it all but lived itself, a verdant magma
spilled forth to inundate the land.

And it was green. Oh, it was a green so bright
it had its own special niche in the spectrum of the
impossible, a green pervasive, an everywhere-all-at-
once, omnipotent green.

World of a chlorophyllous god.

Save for a few pockets of rancid blue, the oceans
themselves were green from a surfeit of drifting plant
life that nearly strangled the waters. The mountains
were green until they blended into green froth; only
at the heights did lichens battle with creeping ice as
on most worlds waves warred with the land. Even
the air had a pale green cast to it, so that looking
through it one would seem to be staring through
lenses cut from purest peridot.

There was no question of the planet's ability to
support life. Rather, it was a question of it's support-
ing too much life, too well.

Even so, in all the life that grew and flew and
fought and died on the most fertile globe in the heav-
ens, there was not a single creature that thought—not
in the manner in which thought is usually and com-
fortably denned.

It must be considered that that which inhabited the
world with no name regarded the universe in a fash-
1




ion other than usual ... if anything did so at all.
Oh, there were the furcots, of course, but they had
not even a name that could be called a name until
the people came.

They arrived, these people did, on the way to
some place else. To the commander and officers of
the colony ship, who studied and cursed and ranted
at their controls and coordinates, it was a clear case
of a malign accident. This was not the planet to which
their automatic pilot should have brought them. Now
they were in orbit, with no fuel to go anywhere else,
without proper equipment to settle on this world, with-
out time or way to call for help. They would have
to make do with this calamitous landfall.

The colonists voted a Soviet ballot and set about
the matter of bringing civilization to this world. They
were tired and desperate and overconfident, but un-
prepared.

They put down in that green hell. It filtered out
the preponderance of human chaff from the seed
grain right quick and neat, and ate them alive. And
it changed those it did not.

Mankind in those early days was used to controlling
the universe, by force if necessary. Those who held to
such practice did not beget a second generation on
the world with no name. A few, less constrained by
pride and more resilient, survived and had children.
Their offspring grew up with no illusions about the
supremacy of humankind or anykind. They matured
and observed the world around them through different
eyes.

Roll the log.

Give and take.

Bend with the wind.

Adapt, adapt, adapt.. .1

II

Born watched the morning mist rise and dreamed
of the sun. He snuggled deeper into the cranny in the
thomabar tree and wrapped his cloak of green fur
more tightly about himself. Thoughts of the sun
cheered him a little. Hard work, much climbing, and
courage had gifted him with that sight three times in
his modest lifetime. Not many men could boast of
that, he prided himself.

To see the sun one had to climb to the top of the
world. And crawl to the crown of one of the Pillars
or emergents that were the world's buttresses. To as-
cend to such places was to court death from the host
of ravenous shapes that drifted and soared in the Up-
per Hell.

He had done it three times. He was among the
bravest of the brave—or as some in the village in-
sisted, the maddest of the mad.

The damp mist thinned further as the rising sun
sucked moisture from the Third Level. He shivered.
It was dangerous as well as uncomfortable to rest
comparatively exposed so early in the day, when all
sorts of unpleasant things roamed the canopy world.
But dawn and dusk were the best times for hunters
to hunt, and Bom counted himself their equal. A
good hunter did not hide away safe while others took
the best game.

He thought of calling to Ruumahum, but the big
furcot was not close by, and a yell now would surely
scare away potential kill. For the moment he would
have to do without the comfort of his companion's
hulking warmth.

That Ruumahum was within calling distance Bom
did not doubt. Once a furcot was joined to a person

3

it never strayed far until that person died. When
he died . . . Born angrily shrugged off the thought.
These were useless musings for a man engaged in a
hunt

Three days out from the village now and he had
encountered nothing worth taking. Plenty of bush-
ackers, but he would walk the surface itself before he
would return to the village with only a bushacker or
two. He burned with remembrance of Losting's return
with the carcass of the breeder, remembrance of the ad-
miration and acclaim accorded the big man. Small
things, frivolous things, but nevertheless he burned.

The breeder had been as big as Losting, all claws
and pincers, but it was those threatening claws and
pincers that were filled with the best white meat, and
Losting had laid them at the feet of Brightly Go and
she hadn't refused them. That was when Bom had
stormed out of the village on his present, and thus
far futile, hunt.

He had never been able to match Losting in size
or strength, but he had skill. Even as a child he had
been clever, faster than Tlis friends, and had taken
every opportunity to prove it. Though none questioned
his abilities now, he would have been appalled to
learn that everyone considered him a bit reckless, a
touch crazy. They wouldn't have understood Bom's
constant need to prove himself to others. In this one
way, he was a throwback.

Now he was soloing again, always a dangerous sit-
uation. He concentrated on shutting himself off from
the world, blended with the foliage, became a part of
the prickly green, virtually invisible in the meandering
pathway of the cubble.

The mist had fled, rising into the Second Level.
The air was clear although still moist. Bom's view of
the big epiphytic bromeliad several meters down the
vine was unobstructed. The huge parasitic blossom
grew from the center of the cubble, parasite feeding
on parasite. Broad spatulate leaves of olive and black
backed the green bloom. Thick petals grew tightly to-
gether, curving out and up to form a water-tight basin.
As was usual following the evening rain, it was now

filled with fresh water a meter deep. Eventually, some-
thing worth killing would come to partake of it.

Around him the forest awoke, the hylaeal chorus of
barks, squeaks, chirps, howls, and screeches taking up
where less loquacious nocturnal cousins had left off.

He was discouraged enough to consider trying an-
other place, when he detected movement in the
branches and lianas above the natural cistern. He
risked edging forward, momentarily breaking the cam-
ouflage of his wavy green cloak. Yes, a definite
rustling, still well above the cubbleway, but traveling
downward.

Moving as little as possible, he shifted the snuffler
from its resting place. The meter-and-a-half-long tube
of green wood was six centimeters around at its back
end, narrowing to barely one at its tip. Gently he
slid it out on the hump of wood in front of him. It
rested there motionless, like a leafless twig. He sighted
it on the cistern. Reaching into the quiver slung across
his back under the cape, he pulled out one of the
ten-centimeter-long thorns it held. Holding it care-
fully by its fan-shaped tail end, where it had been
snapped from the parent plant, he slid it into the open
back end of the snufiler.

The sack slung next to the quiver produced a tank
seed. It was bright yellow, veined with black and
slightly bigger around than a man's fist. Its leathery
surface was taut as a drum. Bom eased it into the
back of the snuffler, then latched the backblock in
place. Above, the rustling had become a crashing and
bending of thick branches.

Wrapping his right hand around the pistollike trig-
ger and using the other to steady the long barrel,
he settled himself on the weapon, still as a statue.
Concentrating on the bromeliad, he strove to reach
out and become one with the plant.

See what a fair resting place I offer, he thought
tensely. How spacious this cubble limb, how broad
and tasty its companions, how clear and fresh and
cool the water I have caught so patiently just for you.
Come down to me and drink deep of my well!

A lost breeze blew, rifBing leaf tips on the bromeliad.
Bom held his breath and prayed it would not carry

5

his scent to whatever was making its ponderous way
downward.

A last loud crunching of parted vegetation, and
the vertical traveler showed himself—a dark brown
cone shape, covered with stubby brown fur. At the
flat end of the cone two long tentacles reached out.
Red-irised eyes tipped them. Evenly spaced around
the cone-shaped body of the grazer were four thickly-
muscled arms, which held it suspended between upper
and lower branches with the aid of the prehensile
tail that extended from the point of the cone.

Nearly two meters of bulk, five times Bora's weight,
the grazer would be difficult to kill. The thick, close-
matted fur would be hard to penetrate, but only a
thin bristle covered (he flat base of the cone. To
strike there Born would have to wait until the creature
turned toward him. The tiny round mouth set in the
center of the base was harmless, lined with four op-
posing sets of flat grinding teeth. But those arms could
reduce the cubble path to splinters. A man would
come apart much more easily.

One arm shifted its grip, grabbed a lower branch.
The tail curved down to grip the same support. Then
the upper and left arm let go and the grazer swung
lower still. Born wished he had prepared a little more
thoroughly, setting out a second tank seed and jacari
thorn. Now it was too late. A single slight movement
from him and the grazer would be gone in a blur
of arms and tail. It could travel up, down, or sideways
through the forest with tremendous speed. It could
also circle behind a man almost before he had time
to turn.

It paused on the liana directly above the cistern.
The tail and double-handed grip rotated it slowly as
it looked in all directions. Once, it seemed to Born
that the weaving eyes stared straight at his hiding
place, but they neither stopped nor hesitated and
swung on past. Apparently satisfied with the state of
the neighborhood, the grazer dropped to the cubble.
Three arms supported it in a semistanding pose on
the outer edge of the bromeliad. It leaned forward,
the broad flat face dipping down to the water. Born
could hear slurping sounds.

6

The real problem was: when he whistled, would
that massive head turn left or right? If he guessed
wrong, he would lose precious, perhaps decisive, sec-
onds. Making his choice, Born slid the tip of the
snumer slightly in the grazer's direction. He pursed
his Ups and let go with a low, stuttering whistle. The
grazer wouldn't touch meat, but flowerkit eggs were
a delicacy.

At the sound of Bom's imitation of a female flower-
kit's danger call, the big head came up and around
and stared directly at him. Letting out a short, nerv-
ous breath, the hunter pulled hard on the trigger. In-
side the barrel a long, sharpened sliver of ironwood
shot backward, punctured the tank seed's stretched
skin. There was a soft bang as the gas-filled seed
exploded. The compressed gas was further compressed
by the narrowing barrel of the snufiler. Thus pro-
pelled, the jacari thorn shot outward and hit square
center of the grazer's flat, bristly face, just above
the mouth and between the two eye stalks.

All four jaws dilated. There was a horrid choking
shriek. The aural catalyst set off the surrounding
forest, and the panicked howling and crying continued
for long moments.

The grazer took a hopping, threatening jump to-
ward Born, shook briefly as it landed barely two
meters away, and collapsed down off the cubble. But
the paralyzed hands and tail held it firm to the big
vine. Those powerful, multidigited fingers would have
to be cut or pried open.

He watched the creature steadily. Grazers had a
way of playing dead until their attacker came close,
when they would unexpectedly reach out to clutch
and rend with limb-tearing violence. But this one
didn't even quiver. The thorn had pierced its brain
and killed it instantly.

Bom sighed, put the snumer down and stood up,
stretching cramped muscles. The green fur cloak fell
freely from his neck. Taking his bone skinning knife
from his belt, he stepped free of the sheltering crev-
ice and walked down the broad vine toward the limp
shape.

Easily five times his mass. Born mused, and almost

all of that edible! But tasting it in one's mind and
cooked over a hot fire were two different things.
There was now the small matter of getting the prized
carcass back to the village and dealing with hungry
scavengers along the way. The sooner they left here,

the better.

Bending over the edge of the cubble, he got busy

with the knife. Muscle and tendon parted as he cut
at the hands and tail which held it fast. The grazer

fell into the foliage just below.

A voice like an idling locomotive sounded sud-
denly behind him. Bom leaped instinctively, sailed out
and down before grabbing a branch of the cubble
and jerking to a muscle-biting stop. Panting, he turned
and looked back up. He had recognized the rum-
bling even as he jumped, but too late to stay the

reflex action.

Ruumahum stood looking down at him from the

main bole of the cubble. The furcot moved closer,
all six of his thick legs gripping the wood. The ursine
face peered at him, the three dark eyes set in. a curve
over the muzzle staring down mournfully. Great claws

scratched at the branch.

Born shook his head and swung himself onto the

vine.

"I've told you often, Ruumahum, not to sneak up

on me like that."

"Fun," Ruumahum protested.

"Not fun," Bom insisted, making use of a herba-
ceous stalk to return to his former level. A short
jump and he was back on the cubbleway. Grabbing
Ruumahum by one of his long floppy ears, he pulled
and shook by way of making his point.

The furcot was as long as the grazer, though not
quite as massive. He was also incredibly powerful,
quick, and intelligent. A furcot pack would be the
scourge of the canopy world were it not for the fact
that they were lazy beyond imagining and spent most,
of their lives engaged in fulfilling a single passion-
sleep.

"Not fun," Bom finished, with a last admonishing

yank. Ruumahum nodded, walked around-the hunter,
and sniffed down at the grazer below.
8

"Too old not," he rumbled. "Good eating . . 9
much good eating."

"If we can get it back Home," Bom agreed. "Can

you manage?"

"Can manage," the furcot replied, without a mo-
ment's hesitation.

Bom bent over the edge, studied the corpse. "It
struck a pretty solid branch, but it could easily slip
off. Do you want to pick it up, or circle beneath
and catch it when I shove it free?"

"Circle, catch."

Bom nodded. Ruumahum started downward, mak-
ing a wide circle to take him below the grazer. Once
positioned, Bom would move directly down until he
could push it off. Neither of them wished to descend
after a tumbling carcass to unpredictable depths, to

levels unknown.

There were seven levels to the forest world. Man-
kind, the persons, preferred this, the Third. So did the
furcots. Two levels rose above this one, to a sun-
bleached green roof and the Upper Hell. Four lay
below, the Seventh and deepest being the Lower and
True Hell, over four hundred and fifty meters below

the Home.

Many men had seen the Upper Hell. Bom had seen
it three times and lived. But only two legendary fig-
ures had ever made their way to the Lower. To the
surface. To the perpetually dark swamp, a moist land
of vast open pits and mindless abominations that
crawled and swam and ate.

Or so they had claimed. The first had not been
of whole mind when he returned and had died soon
after. The second had returned with several important
parts of himself gone, but had confirmed the ravings
of his companion, though he, too, screamed almost
every night.

Not even the furcots, hunting back through ancestral
memories, could tell of one of their kind who had ever
descended below the Sixth Level. It was a place to
be shunned. Understandable, then, that neither man
nor companion desired to go hunting there for fallen

prey.
Ruumahum appeared beneath the grazer and

growled. Born shouted an answer and started down.
The grazer was still hanging from the branch when
he reached it, but a single shove was enough to dis-
lodge it. Bracing himself, Ruumahum dug the claws
of rear and middle legs into the hard wood of the
cubble. Reaching out slightly, he slammed both fore-
paws, either of which could crush a man's skull
with much less effort, deep into the body of the

grazer, just below the tail. -
With Bom's aid, the grazer was then balanced

evenly on Ruumahum's back. Forepaws steadied the
dead weight while Bom tied it securely with unbreak-
able fom from the loops at his waist, passing the line
several times round the carcass and under the furcot's
two bellies. He knotted it and stood aside.

"Try it, Ruumahum. Any shifting?"

The furcot dug all three pairs of claws into the
wood and leaned experimentally to the left, then
right. Then he shook deliberately, raised his head, and
lowered his hips."Shift not. Born. Good rest."

Bom studied the huge bulk with concern. "Sure
you can make it all right? It's a long way Home,
and we may have to fight." The load was consid-
erable even for a mature furcot as big as Ruumahum.

The latter snorted. "Can make . . . not sure of

fighting."

"All right, don't worry about it. Kill or no kill,

if we get into any real trouble I'll cut you free." He
grinned. "Just don't go to long sleep on me halfway

between here and Home."

"Sleep? What is sleep?" Ruumahum snorted. The

furcots possessed a peculiar sense of humor, all their
own that only occasionally coincided with that of per-
sons. As Bom was a bit peculiar himself, he under-
stood their jokes better than most.

"Let's go, then."
Back to the hiding place to retrieve the snuffler

and sling it snugly across his back. Then there was
only one more thing to do. Born walked back past
the heavily laden Ruumahum and stopped at the
brim of the bromeliad which had attracted such ex-
cellent prey. He ran his hands caressingly over the
broad leaves and strong petals. Hands cupped, he

10

bent to drink deeply from the clear pool .that the
unlucky grazer had sought. Finishing, he shook the
droplets free and wiped wet palms on his cloak. He
stroked the nearest leaf again in silent tribute to the
plant, and then he and Ruumahum started the ar-
duous trek Homeward.

It was a green universe, true; but its stars and
nebulae were brilliantly colored. Cauliflorous air-trees
growing on the broad branches of the Pillars and
emergents bristled with fragrant blossoms of every
conceivable shape and color, some exuding fragrances
so pungent they had to be avoided lest olfactory
senses be smothered forever. These perfumed blooms
Bom and Ruumahum avoided assiduously. Their lo-
calized miasmas were as deadly as they were sensu-
ous. Vines and creepers put forth flowers of their
own, and in places aerial roots bloomed with their
own flowerings. There were color and variety to make
Earth's richest jungles seem pallid and wan in com-
parison.

. Although plant life held dominance, animal life was
also abundant and lush. Omithoid, mammaloid, and
reptiloid arboreals glided or flew through winding
emerald tunnels. They were outnumbered by crea-
tures that swung, crawled, and jumped along gravity-
defying highways of wood and pulp.

The steady cycle of life and death revolved around
Bom and Ruumahum as they made their way over
crosshatched tuntangcles and cubbies and winding
woody paths back toward the village. A drifter with
helical wings pounced upon an unwary six-legged
feathered pseudolizard, was swallowed in turn when it
chose to land on a false cubble. The false cubble
looked almost identical to the thick wooden creepers
Bom and Ruumahum strode across. Had Bom stepped
on it he would have lost a foot at the least. The
false cubble was a continuous chain of interlocking
mouths, stomachs, and intestines. Both drifter and
pseudolizard vanished down one link of the toothed
branch.

It was close to noon. Occasional shafts of light
reached the Third Level, some digging even deeper

11

to the Fourth and Fifth. Mirror vines shone every-
where, their diamond-shaped reflective leaves bounc-
ing the sun and sending life-giving light ricocheting
hundreds of meters down green canyons to places it
otherwise would never reach. Noontime was the cres-
cendo of the hylaeal symphony. Comb vines and
resonators formed a verdant vocal background for the
songsters of the animal kingdom. They would have
astonished a curious botanist, as would the mirror

vines.
Born was no botanist. He could not have defined

the term.  But his  great-great-great-great-great-
grandfather could have. That knowledge had not kept
him from dying young, however.

Eventually the damp night mist slid about them
with feline stealth. The cheerful raucousness of the
creatures of light gave way to the sounds of awaken-
ing nightlings, whose grunts were darker and deeper,
their cries closer to hysteria, the booming howls of the
nocturnal carnivores a touch more menacing. It was

time to find shelter.

Bom had spent much of the last hour searching

for a wild Home tree. Such trees were rare and he
had encountered none this afternoon. They would have
to settle for less accommodating temporary quarters.
One such lay ten meters Overhead, easily reached
through the interwoven pathways of the forest canopy.

What disease or parasite had caused the great woody
galls to form on the branch of the Pillar tree neither
Bom nor Ruumahum could guess, but they were grate-
ful for their presence. They would serve to gentle
the night. Six or seven of the globular eruptions were
clustered together on the branch. The smallest was
half Bom's size, the largest more than spacious enough

to accommodate man and furcot.

He tested the biggest with his knife, found it far

too tough for the sharpened bone—just as he had
hoped. If his skinning blade could not penetrate the
woody gall, the chances of some predator coming in
on them from behind were small. He untied the dead
grazer—it was already beginning to smell—from
Ruumahum's back, slid the hulk onto the branch.
12

Ruumahum stretched delightedly, fur rippling as the
muscles in his back popped. He yawned, revealing
multiple canines and two razor-sharp lower tusks.

Under Bom's direction, the furcot went to work on
the gall with both forepaws, ripping open nearly all of
one side. Together they wrestled the carcass into the
cavity. Working carefully and smoothly, Bom tied his
remaining jacari thorns into the length of vine until
they formed a crude barricade across the opening. Any
scavenger who tried to sneak in now risked a fatal
pricking. The barbed thoms crisscrossed the opening
neatly. An intelligent scavenger could work around
them easily, but they would stop anything that was not
a man.

Their kill safely secured for the night, Ruumahum
went to work on the gall next in line, cutting a
smaller opening in it for them to enter. Bom knelt,
peered inside. It was long dead—dry and black. As
he entered, he pulled a packet of red dust from his
belt; Ruumahum was already scraping some of the
dust-dry gall lining into a pile near the opening they
had made. Bom poured a little of the red powder on
a thin scrap of wood and pressed his thumb into it
A few seconds of contact with his body heat was
enough to cause the dust pile to explode in flame
just as the hunter withdrew his thumb. The incendiary
pollen served as a especially effective form of defense
for a certain parasitic tuber. Bom's people had dis-
covered its usefulness the hard way.

He built the tiny blaze into a modest fire that
burned freely on the smooth, dead floor of the gall.
Its dance and crackle was a great comfort in the
blackness of night. Only one more thing to do. He
had to shake Ruumahum violently to awaken him
long enough to cut a tiny hole two-thirds of the way
up the far side of the gall. Circulation and smoke
exit assured, Bom took a piece of dark jerky from
his belt pouch and chewed at the spicy, rock-hard
meat.

The evening rain began. It would rain all night—
not an occasional downpour, but a steady, even rain
that would cease two hours before dawn. With few
exceptions, it had rained every night Bom could re-

13

call. As sure as the sun rose in the morning, the rain
came down at night. Water drummed steadily on the
roof of the gall, flowed down its curved sides to drip
away to depths unseen. Ruumahum was fast asleep.

Bom studied the fire for several minutes. Putting
the rest of the jerky away for the next night, he
nestled himself into Ruumahum's flank. The furcot
stirred slightly in sleep, pressing against the inner wall
of the gall, his head curved into his chest. Born
sighed, stared at the solid wall of blackness beyond
the fire. He was satisfied. They had met no scavengers
on this first day of return, and Ruumahum had han-
dled the massive load of the great grazer without fall-
ing asleep even once. He stroked the furcot's fur
appreciatively, running his fingers through the thick
green coat.

A warm, dry shelter for the night, too. Many nights
spent in wetness made him appreciate the dry gall.
Pulling the green fur cloak tightly about him, he
tamed on his side. His knife was close to his right
hand, the snuffler ready at his feet. Relatively con-
tent and more or less confident of not waking up in
the belly of some nightcrawler, he fell into a sound,
dreamless sleep.

It had been a fairly hard rain, Bom reflected as he
stared out through the bole cut in the gall. Behind
him, Ruumahum slept on oblivious. The furcot would
continue to do so until Bom woke him. Left to
his own devices, a furcot would sleep all but a few
hours a day.

Droplets still fell from the green sky above, though
the rain had long since ceased. A couple struck Bom
in the face. He shook the tepid moisture away. Walk-
ing would be slippery and uncertain for a while, but
they would start immediately anyway. He was anxious
to be Home. Anxious to see the look on Brightly
Go's face when he dumped the grazer at her feet.

Rising, he booted Ruumahum in the ribs a couple
of times. The furcot moaned. Bom repeated the ac-
tion. Ruumahum got to his feet two at a time, grum-
bling irritably.
"Already morning... ?"

14

"Long day's march, Ruumahum," Bom told him.
"Long rain last night. There should be red berries
and pium out before midday."

Ruumahum brightened at the thought of food. He
would have preferred to sleep, but . . . pium, now.
A last stretch, extending forepaws out in front of
him and pulling, digging eight parallel grooves into
the alloy-tough dead base of the gall. Persons, he had
to admit, were sometimes useful to have around. They
had a way of finding good things to eat and making
the very eating more enjoyable. For such rewards
Ruumahum was willing to overlook Bom's faults. His
triple pupils brightened. Humans flattered themselves
with the idea that they had done an awesome job of
domesticating the first furcots. The furcots saw no need
to dispute this. The reality of it was that they had
stuck with the persons out of curiosity. Human persons
were the first beings the furcots had ever encountered
who were unpredictable enough to keep them awake.
One could never quite predict what a person might
do—even one's own person. So they kept up the pact
without really understanding why, knowing only that

in the relationship there was something worthwhile
and good.

Keeping hearts of pium in mind enabled Ruumahum
to arrange the grazer carcass on his back without fall-
ing asleep more than once in the process. So Bom
lost little of bis precious time.

Either no scavenger had blundered into their camp,
or else they had elected not to risk those deadly in-
terlocking thorns. Bom recovered all the vine-entwined
jacaris, reset the poison darts in the bottom of his

quiver, looped the vine around his belt, and started
off again.

"Close Home," Ruumahum muttered that evening,
pausing to send a thick curving tongue out to groom
the back of a forepaw.

Bom had been recognizing familiar landmarks and
tree blazes for over an hour. There was the storm-
treader tree that had killed old Hannah in an unwary
moment. They gave the black and silver bole a wide
berth. Once they had to pause as a' Buna floater
drifted by, trailing long stinging tentacles. As they

15




waited, the floater let out a long sibilant whistle and
dropped lower, perhaps to try its luck on the Fourth
Level where scampering bushackers were more com-
mon.

Born had stepped out from behind a trunk and
was about to remove his cloak when above them
sounded a shriek sufficient to shatter a pfeffennall,
more violent than the howl of chollakee hunting. So
sudden, so overpowering was the scream that the
normally imperturbable Ruumahum was shocked into
a defensive posture, backing up against the nearest
bole despite the restrictive mass of the grazer, fore-
paws upraised and claws extended.

The scream dropped to a moan that was abruptly
subsumed by an overpowering, frightening roar of
crackings and snappings. Even the branch of the near-
by Pillar tree shook. Then the branch they stood
on rocked fiercely. With his great strength, Ruuma-
hum was able to maintain his perch, but Bom was
not so secure. He fell several meters, smashing through
a couple of helpless succulents before he hit an
unyielding protrusion. He started to bounce off it be-
fore he got both arms locked around the stiff fom.
The vibrating stopped, and he was able to get his
legs around it, too.

Shaking, he pulled himself up. Nothing felt broken,
and everything seemed to work. But his snuffler was
gone; its restraining tie had snapped, sending it bounc-
ing and spinning into the depths. That was a severe
loss.

The crashing and breaking sounds faded, finally
stopped. As he had fallen, Bom thought he had seen
in the distance through the green an impossibly wide
mass of something blue and metallic. It had passed
as swiftly as he had fallen. As he stared that way
now there was nothing to be seen but the forest.

Peepers and orbioles came out of hiding, called
hesitantly into the silence. Then bushackers and flow-
erkits and their relatives joined in. In minutes the
hylaea sounded and resounded normally again.

"Something has happened," Ruumahum ventured
softly.

"I think I saw it." Bom stared harder, still saw

16

only what belonged. "Did you? Something big and
blue and shining."

Ruumahum eyed him steadily. "Saw nothing. Saw
self falling to Hell and gone. Concentrated on staying
here with grazer weight pulling there. No time for
curious-looking."

"You did better than I, old friend," Bom admitted,
as he climbed up toward the furcot. He tested a liana,
found it firm, and started off in the direction of the
murderous sounds. "I think we'd better—"

"No." A glance over his shoulder showed the furcot
with his great head lowered and moving slowly from
side to side in imitation of the human gesture of
negation. Three eyes rolled toward the path they had
been following.

"So far, lucky be we, person Bom. Soon though,
others grazer to smell will begin. We will fight have
to every step to Home. To Home go first. This
other"—and he nodded in the direction of the break-
ing and crashing—"I would talk of first with the
brethren, who know such things quickly."

Bom stood thinking on the woody; bridge. His in-
tense curiosity—or madness, if one believed many of
his fellows—pulled him toward the source of the
sounds, however threatening they had been. For a
change, reason overcame. Ruumahum and he had
been through much in the killing and carrying of the
grazer. To risk losing it now for no good reason was
unsound thinking.

"Okay, Ruumahum." He hopped back onto the
bigger branch and started toward the village again.
A last look over his shoulder still showed only speckled
greenery and no unnatural movement. "But as soon
as the meat's disposed of, I'm coming back to find
out what that was, whether or not you or anyone
else comes with me."
"Doubt it not," Ruumahum replied knowingly.

17



III

They reached the barrier well before darkness. In
front of them, the hylaea seemed to become a single
tree—the Home-tree. Only the Pillars themselves were
bigger, and the Home-tree was a monstrously big
tree for certain. Broad twisting branches and vines-d-
own shot out in all directions. Air-trees and cubbies
and lianas grew in and about the tree's own growth.
Born noted with satisfaction that only plants which
were innocuous or helpful to the Home-tree grew on
it. His people kept the Home-tree well and, in turn,
the Home-tree kept them.

The vines-of-own were lined with flowers of bright
pink, with pollen pods which sat globelike within
them. These pods were akin to the yellow tank
seeds that made the snufflers such deadly weapons,
but far more sensitive. A single touch on the sensi-
tive pink surface would cause the paper-thin skin to
rupture, sending a cloud of dust into the air that
would kill any animal inhaling it, whether through
nostril, pore, or other air exchanger. The vines en-
tangled and crossed the tree in the middle of the
Third Level—the village level—forming a protective
net of deadly ropes around it.

Bom approached the nearest, leaned over and spat
directly into the center of one of the blossoms, avoid-
ing the pod. The blossom quivered, but the pod did
not burst. The pink petals closed in on themselves.
A pause, then the vines began to curl and tighten
like climbing vines hunting for a better purchase. As
they retracted, a clear path was formed through which
Bom and Ruumahum strode easily. Even as Ruuma-
hum was through, the outermost vines were already
relaxing once again, expanding, coming together and

shutting off the pathway. The bloom into which Bom
had spat opened its petals once more to drink the faint
evening light.

A casual observer would note that Bom's saliva had
disappeared. A chemist would be able to tell that it
had been absorbed. A brilliant scientist might be able
to discover that it had been more than absorbed—
it had been analyzed and identified. Bom knew only
that carefully spitting into the bloom seemed to tell
the Home-tree who he was.

As he walked toward the village proper he tried
to whistle happily. The song died aboming. His mind
was occupied with the mysterious blue thing that had
come crashing down into the forest. Rarely, one of
the greater air-trees would overreach its rootings, or
overgrow its perch, and fall, bringing down creepers
and lesser growths with it. But never had Bom heard
such a smashing and shattering of wood. This thing
had been far heavier than any air-tree. He knew that
by the speed with which it had fallen. And there was
that half familiar, metallic gleam.

His thoughts were not on bis expected triumph as
he entered the village center. Here, the enormous trunk
of the Home-tree split into a webbing of lesser boles,
forming an interlocking net of wood around a central
open space, before joining and growing together high
above to form once more a single tapering trunk
that rose skyward for another sixty meters. With
vines and plant fibers and animal skins the villagers
had closed off sections of the interweaving trunklets
to form homes and rooms impervious to casual rain
and wind. For food, the Home-tree offered cauliflorous
fruits shaped like gourds, tasting like cranberry, which
sometimes grew within the sealed-off homes them-
selves.

Small scorched places lay within the houses and
beneath the canopy in the central square. These mi-
nute bums did not affect the enormous growth. Each
home also possessed a pit dug into the wood itself.
Here, many times daily, the inhabitants of the tree
offered thanks for its shelter and protection, mixing
their offerings with a mulch of dead, pulpy plants

gathered for the purpose. The mulch also served to
•f n




kill strong odors. When the pits were full they were
cleaned out. The dry residue was thrown over the side
of the Home-tree into the green depths, so that the
pits could be used again. For the tree accepted and
absorbed the offerings with great speed and matchless
efficiency.

The Home-tree was the greatest discovery made
by Bom's ancestors. Its unique characteristics were
discovered when it seemed that the last surviving col-
onists would perish. At that time no one wondered
why a growth unutilized by native life should prove
so accommodating to alien interlopers. When the hu-
man population made a comeback, scouts were sent
out to search for other Home-trees, and a new tribe
was planted. But in the years since Bom's great-great-
great-great-great-grandfather had settled in this tree,
contact with other tribes had first dwindled and then
stopped altogether. None bothered to reopen such
contact, or cared. They had all they could do to
survive in a world that seethed with nightmare forms
of death and destruction.

"Bom is back . . . look, Bom has returned . . .
Born, Bomi"

A small crowd gathered around him, welcoming
him joyously, but consisting entirely of children. One
of them, ignoring the respect due a returning hunter,
had the temerity to tug at his cloak. He looked
down, recognized the orphan boy Din who was cared
for in common.

His mother and father had been taken one day
while they were on a fruit-gathering expedition, by
something that had coughed once horribly and van-
ished into the forest. The rest of the party had fled
in panic and later returned to find only the couple's
tools. No sign of them had ever been found. So the
boy was raised by everyone in the village. For rea-
sons unknown to anyone, least of all to Bom, the
youngster had attached himself to him. The hunter
could not cast the youth away. It was a law—and
a good law for survival—that a free child could
make parents of any and all it chose. Why one would
pick mad Bom, though ...

"No, you cannot have the grazer pelt," Bom

20

scolded, as he gently shoved the boy away. Din, at
thirteen, was no longer a child. He was no longer
pushed so easily.

Following at the orphan's heels was a fat ball of
fur not quite as big as the adolescent. The furcot cub
Muf tripped over its own stubby legs every third
step. The third time he tripped, he lay down in the
middle of the village and went to sleep, this being
an appropriate solution to the problem. Ruumahum
eyed the cub, mumbled disapprovingly. But he could
sympathize. He was quite ready for an extended nap
, himself.

Bom did not head directly for his home, but instead
walked across the village to another's.

"Brightly Go!"

Green eyes that matched the densest leaves peeked
out, followed by the face and form of a wood
nymph supple as a kitten. She walked over to take
both his hands in hers.

"It's good that you're back, Bom. Everyone wor-
ried. I... worried, much."

"Worried?" he responded jovially. "About a little
grazer?" He made a grandiose gesture in the direction
of the carcass. Beneath its great mass Ruumahum
fumed and had unkind thoughts about persons who
engaged in frivolous activities before considering the
comfort of their furcot

Brightly Go stared at the grazer and her eyes
grew big as ruby-in-kind blossoms. Then she frowned
with uncertainty. "But Bom, I can't possibly eat all
that!'

Bom's answering laughter was only slightly forced.
"You can have what you need of the meat, and your
parents, too. It's the pelt that's for you, of course."

Brightly Go was the most beautiful girl in the vil-
lage, but sometimes Bom found himself thinking unflat-
tering things about her other qualities. Then, he
would eye her thin wrapping of leafleather and forget
everything else.

"You're laughing at me," she protested angrily.
"Don't laugh at me!" Naturally, that encouraged him
to laugh even more.




"Losting," she said with dignity, "doesn't laugh at

me."
That shut him up quickly. "What does it matter

what Losting does?" he shot back challengingly.

"It matters to me."
"Huh . . . well." Something had suddenly gone

wrong somewhere. This wasn't working out the way
he had imagined it would, the way he had planned

it. Somehow it never did.

He looked around the silent village. A few of the
older people had stared out at him when he had re-
turned. Now that the novelty of his survival had
worn off, they had returned to their household
tasks. Most of the active adults, naturally, were off
hunting, gathering edibles, or keeping the Home
clear of parasites. The anticipated adulation had never
materialized. He had risked his life, then, to return
to a cluster of curious children and to the indifference
of Brightly Go. His earlier euphoria vanished.

"I'll clean the pelt for you, anyway," he grumbled.
"Come on, Ruumahum." He turned and stalked angrily
off toward the other side of the village. Behind him
Brightly Go's face underwent a series of contortions
expressing a broad spectrum of emotions. Then she
turned and went back inside her parent's compound.

Ruumahum let out a snort of relief when the dead-
weight was finally untied and he could shake it from
his back. Whereupon he walked directly to his comer
in the large single room, lay down, and entered
that region most beloved of all furcots.

Muttering to himself Born unpacked his hunter's
pouch-belt, removed his cloak, and set about the busi-
ness of preparing the grazer. He wielded the bone
knife so angrily he almost cut through and ruined
the skin several times. The layer of fat beneath the
skin was next. Turning the carcass was a laborious
job, but Born managed without having to wake
Ruumahum. The fat was slung into a wooden
trough. Later it would be melted down and rendered
into candles. Then he was at the meat, cutting away
huge chunks to dry and preserve. Organs and other
nonedibles went into the pit at the back of the room.
This he covered with the ready mulch mixture, add-

22

ing water from a wood cistern. The Home would be
pleased.

The hollow backbone and the huge flaring circular
ribs he separated, cleaned and scoured, and set out-
side where the sunlight would dry them. The thick
bone would make tools and ornaments. The teeth were
valueless, not worth wearing, unlike those of the
carnivorous breeder Losting had killed. He would
make no necklace of these flat, grinding molars to wear
at ceremonies. But he would eat well.

Once the grazer had been reduced to its useful
components. Born cleaned his hands and arms. Moving
to a comer he pulled aside a curtain of woven fiber.
Rummaging behind it he found his other snumer. He
would have to secure a second one now. He studied
it and thought over the problem. He would get
Jhelum to make one. His hands were far more skillful
at working the green wood than Bom's, and quicker.
He smiled slightly. He would lose most of his grazer
in trade for the new snuffler, but he would still have
good eating for a time. Jhelum, who did not hunt
and who had two youngsters and a wife, would be
appreciative of the meat.

"I am going to see Jhelum, the carver, Ruumahum.
I'll--"

A long low whistling came from the furcot's comer.
Born uttered an angry word. It seemed no one cared
whether he lived or died. He ripped the leafleather
screen aside and marched off toward Jhelum's place.

Most of the remainder of the day was taken up
in ^working out the arrangements of the exchange. In
the end, Jhelum agreed to prepare the new snuffler
in return for three-fourths of the grazer meat and
the whole skeleton. Ordinarily Born would never have
gone so high. He had worked nearly a week to get
the grazer, and taking such prey involved uncommon
risk. But he was tired, frustrated by the indifferent re-
ception, and confused by Brightly Go. Besides, Jhelum
showed him an exquisite section of green wood pipe,
almost blue in spots, that could be used for the
weapon. It would make an exceptionally handsome
snuffler. He would not be cheated, but neither would
he get a bargain.

23

He climbed alone into the upper reaches of the
village, to where trunklets started to rejoin to form
a single bole. From there he could look back at
the village and out at the forest wall.

The village center was the largest open space he
had ever seen in his life, save for the Upper Hell,
of course. Here he could relax and study the world
without fear of attack. As he watched, a glass flitter
touched down alongside a pink vines-of-own blossom.
Red and blue wings fluttered lazily, the sun shining
through the transparent organic panes.

This was another thing that prompted some in the
village to call Born a little mad. Only he sat and
wasted his time watching things like flitters and
flowers, which could neither nourish nor kill. Bom
himself did not know why he did such things, but
something within him was gratified when he did.
Gratified and warmed. He would learn all there was
to know about everything.

Reader, the shaman, had tried numerous times to
exorcise the demon that drove Bom to such waste-
fulness, and had failed as many times. Bom had
submitted to such ministrations only at the urgings of
the worried chief couple. Sand and Joyla. Eventually,
Reader had given up, pronouncing Bom's aberrations
incurable. As long as he harmed no one, all agreed
to let Bom alone. All wished him well.

All save Losting, naturally. But Losting's dislike
had its roots not in Bom's aberrations, but in one of
his obsessions.

A drop of lukewarm rain hit Bom on the forehead,
trickled down his face. It was followed by another
and more. It was time to join the council.

He made his way back through the trunklets into
the village. The fire had been lit in the center of the
square on the place scorched tough and black by
many such fires. A broad canopy of woven leafleather
kept the rain off and there was room beneath for all
the villagers. Already most of the people were as-
sembled, Sand, Joyla, and Reader foremost among
them.

As he trotted down through the now steady rain,
he spotted Losting. Entering the circle, Bom took his

24

place among the men opposite his rival. Losting had
apparently learned of Bern's return and his offer of
the grazer pelt, for he glared with more venom than

usual across the fire at him. Bom smiled back pleas-
antly.

The steady patter of warm rain falling on the leaf-
leather and dripping to the wood-ground murmured in
counterpoint to the sounds of the assembled people.
Occasionally a child laughed, to be shushed by his
elders.

Sand raised an arm for silence. Beside him, Joyla did
likewise. The people became quiet. Sand, who had
never been a big man—perhaps about Bern's size-
now, shrunken and bent with age, appeared even
smaller. Nevertheless, his presence was still impres-
sive. He was like a weathered old clock that spent
all its time patiently, solemnly ticking, but struck
startlingly loud and clear at the necessary moment.

"The hunting was good," someone reported.

"The hunting was good," the assembly echoed ap-
provingly.

"The gathering has been good," Sand intoned.

"The gathering has been good," the chorus agreed
readily.

"All who were here last are here now," Sand ob-
served, staring around the circle. "The sap runs strong
in the Home."

"The faring of the ready pod," announced one of
the women in the circle. "The seed of Morann and
Oh ripens. She will ripen within the month." Sand
and everyone else nodded or murmured approval.

Somewhere far above, thunder pealed, echoed down
cellulose canyons, rolled off chlorophyllous cliffs. The
evening litany droned on: how much and what kinds
of fruit and nuts gathered; how much of what kinds
of meat killed and cured; the experiences and ac-
complishments and failures of each member of the
tribe for that day now past.

There was an appreciative, admiring murmur from
the crowd when Born announced the taking of the
grazer, but it was not as strong as he had wished.
He did not take into account the fact that there was
25




something else paramount in everyone's mind. It was
for Reader to bring it up.

"This afternoon," he began, gesturing with his totem
of office, the holy axe, "something came out of the
Upper Hell into the world. Something gigantic beyond
imagining—"

"No, not beyond imagining," Joyla interrupted. "It
must be assumed the Pillars are greater."
Appreciative mutters sounded in agreement.
"Well considered, Joyla," Reader admitted. "Some-
thing for its size, heavy beyond imagining, then," and
this time he looked satisfied as Joyla remained silent.
"It entered the world northwest of the stormtreader
and passed on to the Lower Hell. Probably it was
a denizen of that Hell visiting its cousins in the Up-
per, and it has returned now to its home."

"Might we not be wrong about the demons of the
Upper?" someone in the crowd ventured. "Might they
not in truth grow as large as those below? We know
Httle enough of both Hells."

"And I for one," someone else put in, "have no
desire to know more!" There was sympathetic laughter.

"Nevertheless," the shaman insisted, gesturing with
the axe at the dweller who had preferred his com-
fortable ignorance, "this particular demon chose to
descend near to us. What if it has not returned to its
home in the depths? It has made no sound or. move-
ment since its arrival. If it remains near us, who can
say what it might do?" There were nervous stirrings
in the crowd. "There is a chance it might be dead.
While the opportunity to inspect a dead demon would
be interesting, so much meat would be more valuable."

"Unless its relatives come around to claim its
corpse," someone shouted, "in which case I'd rather
be elsewhere!" There were mutters of agreement.

Lightning crackled above the tallest emergent, and
thunder rolled down to them again. To his amazement
Bom found himself suddenly on his feet, speaking. "I
don't think it was a demon." There was a mass shift-
ing of bodies as all eyes came to focus on him. The
abrupt attention made him acutely uncomfortable, but
he held his ground.

"How do you know? Did you see the thing?"

26

Reader finally asked, recovering from Bom's unex-
pected pronouncement. "You said nothing of this to
anyone."

Bom shrugged, tried to sound casual about it. "No
one rushed to ask me about it."

"If it was not a demon, this thing you say you
saw, then what was it?" asked Losting suspiciously.

Bom hesitated. "I do not know. I had but the
briefest glimpse of it as it fell through the world-
but see it I did!"

Losting sat back in his place, his muscles rippling
in the firelight, and smiled at those near him.

"Come, Bom," prompted Joyla, "either you saw
the thing or you didn't."

"But that is exactly it," he protested. "I was falling
myself. I saw it, yet did not. As the breaking sounds
and shaking of the world reached its peak, I saw a
flash of deep blue through the trees. Shining bright
blue, like that of an asanis."

"Maybe that's what you saw, a drifting asanis
bloom," Losting said with a smirk.

"No!" Bom spun to glare angrily across at his rival.
"It was that color, but brilliant, deep, and too . . .
too sharp. It threw back the light."

"Threw back the light?" wondered Reader. "How
could this be?"

How could it? They were all staring at him, half
wanting to believe he had seen something that was
not a demon. He struggled to recall that instant of
falling, that glimpse of alien blue among the branches.
It caught the light like an asanis leaf—no, more
like his knife when it was polished. His eyes roved
absently as he thought furiously for something to com-
pare it with.

"Like the axe!" he blurted, pointing dramatically
to the weapon dangling in the shaman's hand. "It was
like the axe."

Everyone's gaze automatically shifted to the holy
weapon. Reader's included. Soft whispers of derision
sprang up. Nothing was like the axe.

"Perhaps you are mistaken. Bora," Sand ventured
gently. "It did, as you say, happen very fast. And
you were falling when you saw it."

"I'm positive about it, sir. Just like the axe." He
wished he was as certain as he tried to sound, but
he could not back down on his story now without
sounding like a complete fool.

"In any case," he found himself saying, to his hor-
ror, "it is a simple enough matter to prove. We need
only go and look."

The mutterings from the crowd grew louder; they
were no longer derisive, but shocked.

"Born," the chief began patiently, "we do not know
what this thing is or where it has gone. It may have
already returned to the depths from which it probably
came. Let it stay there."

"But we don't know," objected Born, leaving his
place to stand close by the fire. "Maybe it hasn't
returned. Maybe it's down only a level or so, sleep-
ing, waiting to catch the scent of the Home to come
seeking us one by one in the night. If it is such a
monster, then we would do better to seek it out first
and slay it as it sleeps."

Sand nodded slowly, stared around at the people.
"Very well. Who will go with Born to sniff out the
trail of this demon?"

Born turned to look at his fellow hunters, silently
imploring. Long silence, defiant stares. Then, star-
tlingly, a response came from an unexpected quarter.

"I will go," Losting announced. He stood and stared
smugly across at Bom as if to say, if you're not
afraid of this thing, then there can be nothing to be
afraid of. Bom did not meet the other man's eyes.

Reluctant assent came from the hunter Drawn and
the twins Talltree and Tailing. The other hunters
would eventually have given in and agreed out of
fear of appearing cowardly, but Reader raised the
axe. "It is enough. I will go, too, despite my better
judgment It is not appropriate that men should visit
one of the damned without an authority on damnation."

"That's for sure," someone muttered. The laughter
this provoked was a welcome release from the solem-
nity of the proceedings.

Sand put a hand over his mouth delicately to hide
an unchiefly chuckle. "Now let us pray," he intoned
forcefully, "that those who seek out the demon shall

find him sickly and weak, or not find him at all, and
return to us whole and sound." He raised both hands,
lowered his head, and commenced a chant

No Earthly theological authority would have recog-
nized that chant. No minister, priest, rabbi, or witch
doctor could have identified its source or inspiration,
though any bioengineer could. What none of them
could have explained was why this chant seemed so

effective there under the crying night sky and leaf-
leather canopy.

Triple orbs glowed like hot coals, reflecting the dance
of the distant flickering fire. Ruumahum lay in the
crook in the branches and stared down doubtfully at
the gathered people. His muzzle rested on crossed
forepaws. A clumsy scratching and clawing sounded
on the limb alongside bis resting place. A moment
later, forty kilos of awkwardly propelled fur and flesh
crashed into his flank. He growled irritably and glanced
back. It was the cub who had attached itself to the
orphan young person. Din.

"Old one," Muf queried softly, "why are you not
at rest like the others of the brethren?"

Ruumahum turned his gaze back to the distant
leafleather canopy and the chanting humans beneath.
"I study Man," he murmured. "Go to sleep, cubling."

Muf considered, then crept up close to the massive
adult and likewise stared down toward the fire. After

a pause, he looked up questioningly. "What are they
doing?"

"I am not certain," Ruumahum replied. "I believe
in some ways they are trying to become like the
brethren ... like us."

"Us? Us?" Muf coughed comically in the rain and

sat back on his several haunches. "But I thought

we strive to become like the persons?"
"So it is believed. Now, go to sleep, shoot!"
"Please, old one, I am confused. If Man is trying

to become like us and we are trying to become like

Man—then who is right?"

"You ask many questions, cub, you do not fully
understand. How can you expect to understand the
answer? The answer is . . . That-Which-Is-Sought, a
29




meeting, a conjoinment, a concatenation, an inter-
woven web."
"I see," whispered Muf, not seeing at all. "What

will happen when that is achieved?"

"I do not know," Ruumahum replied, looking back
to the fire. "None of the brethren know, but we
seek it anyway. Besides, Man finds us interesting and
useful and believes himself master. The brethren find
Man useful and interesting and care not about master-
ing. Man thinks he understands this relationship; We
know we do not. For this contented ignorance we
envy him." He nodded in the direction of the as-
sembled persons below. "We may never understand it.
Revelation is never promised, only hoped for."

"I understand," murmured the cub, not understand-
ing at all. He struggled awkwardly to his feet and
turned to go, then paused to look back. "Old one,
one more question."

"What is it?" Ruumahum grumbled, not turning his
gaze from the prayer gathering.

"It is rumored among the cubs that we neither
spoke nor thought till the persons came."

"That is no rumor, budding, that is truth. Instead,
we slept." He yawned and showed razorlike teeth and
tusks. "But so did Man. We wake together, it is
thought."

"I know," Muf admitted, not knowing at all. He
turned and rambled off to find a sleeping place for
the night.

Ruumahum turned his attention to the persons once
more, considered how fortunate he was to have a
person as interesting and unpredictable as Bom. Now
there was this new thing they would go out to find
tomorrow. Well, if the world was to change tomorrow,
he thought as he yawned, it was better to face change
having had a good night's sleep. He rolled over on
his side, tucked his head between fore- and midpaws,
and went instantly and peacefully to that country.

Bom was all for starting before the morning mist
had lifted, but Reader and the others would not hear
of it. Losting viewed the originator of such a pre-
posterous, dangerous idea with pity. Anyone who

30

would even consider moving about the world in mist,
when a man could not see what might be stalking him
from behind or above until it was right on top of
him, had to be more than a little crazy.

There were twelve in the party—six men and six
furcots. The men traveled in single file through the
treeways, while the furcots spread out above, below,
and on both sides, forming a protective cordon around
the persons. Bom and Reader shared the lead, while
Losting, by choice, guarded the rear. The big man
had mixed feelings about this expedition and was
striving to stay as far away from its originator—Born
—as possible. Besides, as much as he disliked Bom
for the other's interest in Brightly Go, Losting was
not so stupid that he failed to recognize Bom's skills.
As such, Bom belonged in the lead. But then, Losting
told himself comfortingly, the mad are always clever.

Their progress through the sunny Third Level
branchings was rapid and uninterrupted. Only once did
distant warning growls, from the left of their course
and below, cause the party to pause and set snufflers.
Taandason, who had made the warning sounds, ap-
peared a short while later on the cubble running
parallel to the persons' path. He was panting slightly
and puffing with anger.

"Brown many-legs," the furcot reported. "A mated
hunting pair. Saw me and the she spat, but her mate
turned her. Gone now." The furcot turned, leaped to
a lower branch, and disappeared in the undergrowth.
Reader nodded with satisfaction and waved the column

forward. Thorns were returned to quivers, tank seeds
to pouches.

A single brown many-leg wouldn't hesitate to charge
two or three men. Born reflected. A mated hunting
pair would take on almost anything in the hylaea.
But a group of man and furcot in such numbers
would cause even the greater forest carnivores to
think twice before attacking. Whether a demon would
think likewise remained to be seen.

They must be nearing the place. Born recognized
a distinctive- Blood tree, its pitcherlike leaves filled
with crimson water caused by the plant's secretion
of tannin. Soon after passing the Blood tree they

31

found themselves walking into a steady breeze. A
responsive murmur sprang up among the marchers.
Within the forest world the wind rarely blew steadily
in any single direction. Instead, gusts of air came and
went like wraiths, darting and curling around branches
and boles and stems like living things. But this breeze
was steady and purposeful and warm. Warm enough,
Born reflected, to come from Hell itself.

Reader brandished his axe, defying any evil spirits
in the area who would dare to come near. Each
man pulled his green cloak more tightly and protec-
tively around him.

Bom motioned the party to slow and spread out.
Ahead of him the world seemed suddenly to change
perspective. He took another couple of steps along
the cubble, pushed aside a drooping whalear leaf,
and cried out at what he saw, one hand tightening
convulsively around a supporting liana. Similar cries
sounded nearby, but he was momentarily paralyzed,
unable to look for his companions.

Not a hand's breadth away the thick wood of the
cubble he stood on had been shattered like a rotten
stem, as had that of other lesser and greater growths
nearby. A vast well had been opened up in the
world. Bom looked up, up, to a circle of strange
color two hundred meters overhead. A patch of deep
blue flecked with white cumulus—the blue of the

Upper Hell.

Below—he gripped the liana ever tighter—below
and down an equally great distance, somewhere at
the Fifth Level, lay a brilliant blue object that caught
the sun like the axe. In its center was something even
more shiny, something that made rainbows from sun-
light, an uneven half-globe of material like a flitter's
transparent wings. Its top was ragged and open to

the air.

Already vines, creepers, cubbies, tuntangcles, and
other growth were destroying the smooth sides of the
well, pushing outward in furious competition for the
wealth of unaccustomed sunlight.

Bom studied the spreading epiphytes and rampaging
growers and estimated that in another twice seven-
days the new vegetation would cover the well com-

32

pletely. They would have to avoid this area for some
time, however, until some denser growth filled it in.

"Here, Born!" a voice called.

He turned to see Reader standing on the broken-off
limb of a Pillar, leaning out as far as he dared and
gesturing with the axe. It flashed like lightning in the
greenish light. In a few minutes every member of the
party had assembled on the meters-wide broken
branch. The furcots had gathered to themselves and
sat silently on one side to see what the persons
would do.

"It is a demon for sure, and it sleeps," began one
of the twins—Talltree, Bom noted.

"I still do not think it is a demon," Bom coun-
tered firmly. "I believe it is a thing, an object that
has been fashioned," and he nodded toward Reader,
"like the axe."

Various exclamations greeted Bom's blasphemous
opinion. Reader held up a hand for quiet. "People,
this is no place for loud noises. The demons of the
Upper Hell could surely come down to this place
through the hole the larger demon has made. We will
discuss this matter further, but I say, quietly." Conver-
sation and argument continued, but in whispers. "Now
then, Bom," continued Reader, "what makes you so
certain this blue thing below us is not a demon, but
an object made like the axe?"

"It has the look of it," Bom replied. "Notice how
regular are its outlines and the way it throws back
the light."

"Might not a demon do this as well? Does not
the skin of the orbiole throw back the light? Are
you certain, Bom?"

Bom found himself looking away. "There is no way
to be sure, shaman, save," and he stared across at the
older man, "to go down to it and see for oneself."

"But if it is a demon?" Drawn wondered loudly,
"and it sleeps, and our pokings awaken it?" The
hunter rose from his squatting position, holding his
snuffler firmly. "No, friend Born. I respect your
guessings and honor your skill, but I will not go with
you. I have a mate and two children and I'm not
ready to go knocking on the skull of a demon to see
33

if anyone is home. No, not I." He paused, thinking.
"But, I will consider what the shaman and my brothers
say."

"Whay say the hunters, then?" asked Reader.

The other twin spoke. "Truly, it may be as Born
says. Be it only a made thing, with no life in it,
then it seems to me no threat to the Home. Or it
may be, as Drawn says, a sleeping demon waiting
only for some careless person to stumble blindly in
and waken it. If we leave it alone it may sleep
forever, or go peacefully on its way. Myself, I think
it is a demon of a new kind, one injured in its fall
from the Upper Hell. We must leave and not disturb
it, but let it die in peace, lest it arise in anger
and destroy us."

Tailing and Talltree rose together and offered fur-
ther opinions. Sometimes one of the twins would begin
a sentence and the other would finish it. They did this
without looking at one another, which was not sur-
prising, for in the forest does one branch of a tree
have to consult with another before putting out leaves?
Some thought the twins were more of the forest than
of Man.

"Whatever it is, shaman," Talltree concluded, "it
seems we have nothing to lose by leaving it undis-
turbed and everything to gain by returning Home
quietly the way we came."

"Don't you care about it at all?" Bom asked
openly. "Aren't you at all curious? Do you not care
if it is a benign demon?"

"I've never heard of a helpful demon and I care
only about surviving," Drawn responded. The others
listened attentively. After Bom, Drawn was the most
skillful hunter in the village. "As it lies"—he nodded
toward the world-well—"it threatens us not, nor the
Home. I do not see a close inspection improving
that. I vote to return Home."

"I also ... and I... and I..."

The word passed around the little circle of persons
in the trees, and it was all against Born. Always
against Born, he thought, furious.

"Go back, then," be shouted disgustedly, moving
34

from the circle to a higher branch. "I'll go down
alone."

The other hunters muttered. Reader and Drawn,
the eldest among them, looked sympathetic, but they
agreed that Bom had not yet acquired caution to
match his other abilities. The village would miss him
if he failed to return. If he would go, then let him go,
but do not match madness with him.

So Born crouched alone on his higher limb and
pouted while his companions made themselves ready.
Their furcots fanning out around them, they started
down the cubble toward the Home.

Despite his feelings, he was half tempted to join
them and try further talk. Only Losting's barely
veiled grin steeled him. Nothing would please that
overripe pium fruit more than to see Bom vanish
forever, leaving him a clear path to Brightly Go. But
Bom would not vanish so conveniently. He would
learn the truth of the blue monster below and return
to tell of it to all. The others who had left would
be ashamed, and Brightly Go would smile favoringly
on him.

Still, it was to be considered that there had been
only brave men in the little group, and that wise
Reader was not an idiot. There still existed the chance
he was wrong and everyone else was right. He put
aside this unpleasant possibility and whistled once,
softly.

Ruumahum appeared in a minute, the small branch
sagging under their combined weight. The furcot eyed
him expectantly, promptly Crossed all four front paws
and went to sleep. Bom studied the massive form ab-
sently before turning his attention to the right. There,
past a few thick fronds and several dangling vines,
lay the pit open to the Upper Hell. At the bottom of
the pit lay an enigma he would have to resolve alone.
Well, not quite alone.

He whacked Ruumahum along one side of his
head, a h(ow that would have jolted a large man.
The furcot merely bunked, yawned, and started
preening itself with a forepaw.
"Up and out," Born said firmly.
Ruumahum stared at him drowsily. "What to do?"

35




"Come, good for nothing. I want a close look at
the blue thing."

Ruumahum snorted. Didn't the person have two
perfectly good eyes of his own? But he conceded
that Born was right. Someone would have to watch
the open spaces above and to the sides while Bom
was exposed in the clearing.

Bom crawled, alone, without loaded snufflers to
back him up, without ironwood spears to reinforce
his confidence, to the edge of the pit and stared
downward. The glistening blue circle lay as before. It
had not moved and showed no sign of moving.
Even as he watched, a loud crackling sounded, and
the object appeared to drop a little lower. The well
it had made was ample testament to its great weight,
and it seemed to be sinking deeper, branch by shat-
tered branch, cubble by overstressed cubble. It might
continue to sink, falling to the Sixth Level and even-
tually to the Lower Hell itself. Bom would not seek
it at that depth for all the meat in the forest, not even
for Brightly Go. He had to proceed now, before the
chance was forever denied him.

He leaned out further over the abyss, tightening his
grip on the seemingly unbreakable liana nearby. The
liana might have been unbreakable. His grip wasn't.
Something clutched him around waist and neck and
yanked hard. The yell in his throat turned to anger
as he disengaged himself from the gentle grasp of
Ruumahum.

"What the-?"

Ruumahum glanced significantly upward, rumbled
softly. "Devil comes."

Bom peered up through a crack in the well wall.
At first he did not see the dark speck against the
sky, but it grew rapidly larger. When the shape be-
came recognizable, Bom retreated another meter into
the forest and loaded the snuffler.

The sky-devil had a long streamlined body sus-
pended between broad wings. Four leathery sacks,
two to a side, inhaled air and expelled it out rub-
bery nozzles near the monster's tail. It moved in
gaspy jerks as it circled lower and lower. A long-
snouted reptilian head weaved atop a snakelike neck.

36

Two yellow eyes stared downward, and needlelike
teeth flashed in the pale green sunlight. Ideally
equipped for skimming silently across the treetops
hundreds of meters above and picking off careless
arboreals, the sky-devil found itself drawn to some-
thing deep hi the well. Three-meter wings left it little
room for maneuvering within that crude cylindrical
gap, but it managed, circling, spiraling lower and
lower in tight circles, examining each section of the
green wall as it dropped.

Bom sat very still on his branch, concealed behind
a broad leaf taller than Losting, wrapped tight in his
green cloak. The devil reached his level, circled, and
passed on. Staying close to the branch, Bom edged his
way to the precipice once again. Far below he saw the
scaled back and wings winding down toward the blue
object. Eventually it reached bottom, folded its wings,
and stopped. The devil walked clumsily on the blue
surface, making its way awkwardly to the half-dome
at the object's apex. It poked at the globe with its
toothed beak, stabbed again. Bom could hear it yell-
ing, a distant, muffled croak.

Another sound drifted up to him. One that pene-
trated above the normal din of comb vines and reso-
nators and chattering chollakees. It was a human
scream, and it came from somewhere near or in the
object!

IV

Bom started downward without thinking, plunging
recklessly from branch to branch, shoulder muscles
straining at the shock, taking meters at a jump.
Ruumahum followed close behind. They were making
enough noise to attract half the afternoon forest
predators, and the furcot told him as much. Wrapped

37

in other thoughts. Born ignored the furcot's warnings. ' |
Once he nearly dropped square onto the back of  ;

a Chan-nock, the big tree-climbing reptile's knobby
back the perfect imitation of a tuntangcle vine as
it lay stretched between the boles of two air-trees.
Bom's foot hit the armored back. Instantly he was
aware he had met flesh and not wood. But he was
moving so fast he was meters below as the Chan-
nock whipped around to crush the interloper. Furious
at missing its prey, the blunt snout swung round for a
stab at Ruumahum. Not even pausing in his down-
ward rush, the furcot stuck out a paw in passing and
crushed the flat, arrowhead-shaped skull.

If Bom had stopped to think about what he was do-
ing, he might have fallen and hurt himself seriously.
But he was traveling on instinct alone. Unhindered,
his reflexes did not fail him. Only when Ruumahum
put on an extra burst of speed, got in front of him, and
slowed down, did Born become conscious of how
fast he had been moving. He nearly dislocated a
shoulder as he slowed to a halt behind the furcot.
Both were panting heavily.

"Why stop now, Ruumahum. We—"
The furcot growled softly. "Are here," he mut-
tered. "Air-devil is near. Listen."

Bom listened. He had been so excited he had
nearly shot past the level at which the blue thing
lay. Now he could hear the horrible half-laugh, half-
coughing of the devil and a scratching sound, a sound
similar to the one Reader produced by running his
nails over the axe blade during the invocations.
Then he was right about the composition of the blue
thing! He had no time to bask in his own brilliance.

A moan sounded now, not a scream; but it was no
less human.

"There are people there and the sky-devil is after
them," Born whispered. "But what people live on the
Fifth Level? All persons known live on the Third
or Second."

"I do not know," Ruumahum answered. "I sense
much strangeness here. Strangeness and newness."
"It needs killing."

38

"Air-devils die slowly, Bom person," advised Ruum-
ahum. "Go carefully."

Bom nodded and they backed deeper into the
brush. "The air-devil may not be able to penetrate
here. It is too big and clumsy on the wood. But if
it does..."

He started searching, working around the well cir-
cumference, always staying well back from the open
pit where the nightmare-in-life scratched and clawed
at the blue thing. He found what might serve—a
certain epiphytic orchid that nestled in the crotch
formed by the great lower limbs of an emergent. The
bottom of the plant overreached the limbs on both
sides, the great ball of self-made soil sending long
air-roots downward in all directions. Above, long
thick petals of dark chalcedony color curled toward
the sky. A wonderful limelike fragrance issued from
the huge flower's depths, its creamy petals many
meters long.

Keeping a careful distance from the gigantic bloom,
Bom moved cautiously back toward the well.

"Softly," Ruumahum urged anxiously. Born looked
back at the furcot and made quieting motions, but he
took the advice. There was more open space here
where the light did not penetrate as well. There
were fewer places to hide, fewer webs of vines and
lianas to lose a big meat-eater in. Surely there was
nowhere near enough open space for the sky-devil to
spread its wings. But it had thick clawed legs and
just maybe could scramble through the open places.
Hence his enlisting of the orchid as a silent ally.
Bom reached the edge of the well bottom. A
cluster of shattered wood and herbaceous growth
bordered it. Everything here was sticky and slippery
from spilled sap. He would have to watch his footing.
Then suddenly he was staring at the sky-devil from
between the leaves. It battered and dug in frustration
at something deep within the blue metal disk. The
moaning, Born now was sure, came from somewhere
inside. Taking a deep breath and wishing for a more
stable footing, he lined up the end of the snufBer
with the skull of the demon, a difficult target that
was bobbing and weaving on a long flexible neck.

39

Born jerked the trigger. There was a tiny explosive
puff as the tank seed popped. The jacari thorn hit
the devil just behind the left eye. It quivered, its slow
nervous system reacting dully to the poison, then it
spun to look in the direction of the shot. At the same
time Born yelled, "Be strong!" at the top of his
lungs, to alert those within the blue metal, then he

turned and raced ba<sk along the branch.

A tremendous thrashing sounded immediately be-
hind him as the sky-devil, showing unexpected
strength, smashed through the outer wall of branches
and vines in its drooling desire to get at him. Born fan-
cied he could feel its fetid breath hot on his neck.

The giant orchid loomed ahead.

That crawling leathery horror was at his spine. At

any second long teeth might close on his neck and snip
his head off. There was no time to look back, no
time to think or consider. He dove past the soil ball
of the flower, reaching out with the end of the snuf-
fler so that the green wood pipe brushed several of

the dozens of dangling rootlets.

Born fell another couple of meters before landing

with a jolt in a bed of hyphae below. Above him,
the tiny rootlets he had brushed and everything around
them curled protectively inward against the bulk of the
plant. The sky-devil burst through the undergrowth,
reaching with claws and jaws for Bom, who stared up
in helpless fascination at that descending abomination.

Too quick to see, the thick white petals of the
pseudo-orchid thrashed in blind fury in all directions.
Three of the petals struck the rampaging devil, curled
shut about it and contracted. The devil seemed to
explode, eyes shooting like ripe seeds from the skull,
wings crumpling, guts and innards shooting in all di-
rections. The plant continued thrashing about for sev-
eral minutes before the petals began to relax.

As it returned to its normal shape and form, the
orchid released the mangled pulp that had been the
sky-devil. The shattered corpse fell bouncing into the
depths. Born sat up and watched it fall, his heart
beating fast. The devil had died too quickly to scream,

never knowing what had hit it.

Using his snuffler as a brace. Born pulled himself

40

erect and climbed over to where Ruumahum lay,
watching him quietly. "I think," he said, trembling
slightly, "we can go help the people now." The furcot
nodded silently.

They started back toward the world-well, once again
giving the now quiescent pseudo-orchid—known in
Bern's village as "Dunawett's plant"—plenty of room.

Born parted the broken stems and walked out into
something he had experienced only a few times in
his life. Something few people ever experienced—
the open air. He stared upward, but from here the
sky was a distant circlet of blue pasted against an
otherwise green heaven,

"Will watch Upper Hell," Ruumahum announced,
sitting himself down by the edge of the well. His
head inclined and he studied the distant blue disk
stolidly.

Born extended a cautious foot, set it down easily
on the deep blue surface of the object. It was cool
and hard, just like the axe blade. Reassured, he
walked out onto the curving surface, making his way
toward the half-dome in the center. As he neared it,
he saw it covered a circular cavity in the metal.
Looking down at the broken, jagged edges of the
dome he saw tangles of tiny vines and roots inside,
which were also made of some shiny, hard substance.

An inspection of the interior of the disk showed
one side made of more metal that was filled with
dents and abrasions from the claws and probing beak
of the sky demon. Bom thought he heard a slight
moaning coming from behind it.

"Hello. Is anyone alive here? It is safe to come out.
The devil has gone to its cousins in Hell."

The moaning ceased abruptly and was followed by
clicking, metallic sounds. Then the section of rectan-
gular metal began to disappear inward, on hinges.

A man peered out and up at him uncertainly. Some-
thing small and reflective shone in his hand. Born
caught his breath. It was an axe—No, no ... a
knife made of the same material as the axe, only
far cleaner and smoother. After a long stare the
man's gaze went around the open cavity in the metal.
When he satisfied himself that Born's words were true

and the sky-devil was safely gone, he emerged into the
open space and commenced a detailed survey of the
mass of tangled instrumentation and components while
keeping a watchful eye on Born.

Born studied the giant. Though he was only a
normal-sized man by normal man standards, he tow-
ered a good twenty-five centimeters over Born. He dis-
played other surprising characteristics, as well. He
was undeniably a person, but the differences were
striking. His hair was orange-red instead of brown,
his eyes blue instead of green, and his skin—his skin
was so pale as not to be believed, though among his
own people he was considered moderately well tanned.
His build was slim and his face freckled and friendly.

"Jan?" A second voice, slightly higher. "Is it clear
to—?" Then the speaker caught sight of Born, stand-
ing quietly on the surface of the skimmer. She was
a couple of centimeters taller than the man. Her body
beneath the torn single-piece jungle suit was bony and
athletic. Short hair the color of tarnished silver in-
dicated she was somewhat older, as well. Strong, long
legs showed from the beige shorts and their color was
also, to Bom, unbelievably pale; She seemed less nerv-
ous than the man, a little more assured.

"Who the hell is that?" she asked with a jerk of
her head. The man she had called Jan continued
picking disgustedly at the crushed remnants of the
skimmer's controls.

"The man who just saved our lives, I think. For
the moment." He stared up at the sky uneasily.

"The sky-devil is dead," Bom informed him. "It
went too near a stimulated Dunawett's plant. It will
not trouble you again."

The man digested this information, grunted some-
thing noncommittal, and turned back to his discouraged
probing. "Board's shot to hell and gone, Kimi," he
finally declared. "What didn't come apart in the touch-
down, that flying carnivore pecked to shreds. This
skimmer isn't going anywhere except the scrap yard."

The woman sat down in the ruins of a swivel
chair, bent now at an angle its designers had never
intended. Bom stared curiously at her. She suddenly

42

became conscious of his attention and looked up at
him.

"What are you staring at, short stuff?"
Born bristled, more at her tone than the words. "If
my presence makes you uncomfortable .. ." He hefted
the snuffler, turned to go.

"No, no, wait a minute, fellow." She rested her
head in crossed arms for a minute. "Give me a sec-
ond, will you? We've just been through a pretty rough
time." She looked up again, locked fingers. "You've
got to understand, when our drive went . . ." She
noticed Born's questioning frown and tried again.
"When the thing that powered our skimmer . . ." The
frown deepened. She patted the metal wall next to her.
"When this thing which carries us through the air . . ."
Bom's face showed an expression of disbelief, but she
pressed on. ". . . crashed here, we thought we were
already dead. Instead we crawled out of what was
left of our chairs and found we were still alive. Shaken,
but alive."

She gestured at the surrounding green walls. "This
incredible planet—three-quarters of a kilometer of
stratified rain forest—cushioned our fall just enough."
Her voice dropped. "Then that long-necked horror
landed on top of us. We barely got through the
engine-access hatch when it started working on the
door. I thought we were dead all over again. Now you
show up and insist some local vegetable has slaugh-
tered something it would take an arm's-length laser
to discourage. And then there's the matter of yourself,
which is no small shock to us, either."

"What about myself?" queried Bom, unaccountably
self-conscious.

She made a fluttering, tired gesture. "Just look at
you." Bom declined to do so. "You're an anomaly,
you don't belong here, according to what we've been
told," she added hastily. "This is supposed to be an
unreported, barely surveyed, uninhabited world known
only to-"

"Careful, Kimi," the man said wamingly, glancing
back over his shoulder.

She waved him off. "What for, Jan. This"-and she
nodded toward Bom—"native obviously knows noth-

43

ing that could complicate our presence here." She
looked back at Born as she got to her feet. "As I
said, this is supposed to be an uninhabited world. All
of a sudden, on the heels of a series of rather dis-
concerting events, we're faced with accepting your
presence. I presume you're not a solitary freak? There

are others of your kind?"

"The village supports many," Born told her, in what

he hoped was an adequate answer. These giants were

fascinating.

"I said native, but what kind remains to be deter-
mined." She studied Bom openly. He bore her exam-
ination because he was engaged in one of his own.
"You're nearly a whole foot shorter than an average
adult, but you've got the arms and shoulders of a
weight-lifter." Her gaze lowered considerably. "And
what look like awfully long, probably prehensile toes.
You're dark as old redwood and with hair to match
. . . but green eyes. Altogether, the most remarkable
specimen I've seen in a long time. Though not," she
added in an odd tone, "for all that, unappealing." The
man made a sound which Born interpreted as one of
distaste, though for what reason he could not imagine.

Strange and fascinating these giants! Yet it was
they who were calling him strange.

"If your people developed here," the woman was
concluding, "despite your coloring and size and grabby
toes, it has to be the most unlikely case of parallel evo-
lution on record. And you speak Terranglo. What do

you say, Jan?"

The man looked up briefly at Born, then sighed and

made a gesture of helplessness toward the board he
had been working on. "I don't know why I'm fooling
with this. It's hopeless. Even if we could fix the drive
without the aid of a full machine shop, that flying
beast chewed up the controls like so many worms in
a paper bag. We're stuck here. The tridee's in no
better shape. And all that talk about dying's probably

still appropriate."

"You give up too soon, too easily, Jan," she ad-
monished him. She looked at Bom. "Our small friend
here appears to have unpredictable resources. I don't
see why he couldn't—"

44

The man whirled, confronting her with outrage
barely held in check. "Are you crazy? It's hundreds
of kilometers to the station through this impenetrable
morass..."

"His people seem able to negotiate it," she said
quietly.

". . . and if you're thinking of hoofing it, guided
by some ignorant primitives—!" he continued.

The language of the giants was peculiar, high and
distorted, but Bom could make out the meaning of
many of their words. One word he recognized clearly,
despite the twisted accent, was "ignorant."

"If you are so much the smarter," he interrupted
sharply, "how come you to be here like this?" And
he kicked the blue skin of the skimmer.

The giant called Kimi smiled. "He's got you there,
Jan." The man uttered another disgusted sound and
made a related gesture. But he didn't call Bom ig-
norant again.

"Now then," the woman said formally, "I think in-
troductions are in order. First off, we'd like to thank
you for saving our lives, which you most surely did."
She glanced at the man. "Wouldn't we, Jan?"

He made a muffled sound vaguely intelligible as
"yes."

"My name," she went on, "is Logan . . . Kimi
Logan. This sometimes buoyant, occasionally depressed
associate of mine is Jan Cohoma. And you?"

"I am called Bom."

"Bom. That's a fine name. A fitting name for one
so brave, for a man who'd tackle a meat-eater like
that winged monster single-handed."

Bom expanded with pride. Strange the giants might
be, but this one at least could be properly admiring.
Maybe one day Brightly Go would regard him as
well as this peculiar giant did.

"You mentioned a village, Bom," she continued.

He turned, pointed up and southwest. "The Home
lies that way, a fair walk through the forest and two
levels higher. My brothers will greet you as friends."
And admire the hunter who had braved the sleeping
blue demon and killed a sky-devil to rescue them, he
thought to himself.

45

He jumped up and down several times on the blue
metal, then noticed that both giants had drawn away
and were watching him. "I'm sorry," he explained. "I
mean you no harm. Of all who came here only I had
the courage to descend and find you out. I guessed
this . . . thing . . . was not alive, but something
carved."

"It's called a skimmer," Cohoma told him. "It car-
ries us across the sky."

"Across the sky," Born repeated, not really believ-
ing the words. It seemed impossible that anything so
heavy could fly.

"We're glad you did. Born. Aren't we, Jan? Aren't
we?" She nudged him and he muttered assent. His
initial antagonism toward Bom was weakening rapidly
as he realized that the small native posed no threat
to them. Quite the contrary, it seemed.

"Yes, it certainly was a brave act. An extraordinary
act, now that I think of it." He smiled. "You've come
this far, Bom. Maybe you could help us at least try
to get back to our station—our home on this world."

"We got a last fix before we went down," Logan
told him. She hesitated, then pointed in a direction
toward the Home tree. "It's in that direction, about
. . . let's see, how can I get some idea of the distance
across to you?" She thought a moment. "You said
something about levels in the forest?"

"Everyone knows the world is made of seven lev-
els," Bom explained, as though lecturing a child,
"from the Lower Hell to the treetops."

"Figure the average height of one of the big
emergents," she murmured. "Say a little over seven
hundred meters." She engaged in some mental com-
putation, translating meters into levels, and told Bom
how far away the station lay.

Now it was Bom's turn to smile; he was too cour-
teous to laugh. "No one has ever traveled more than
five days' journey from the Home," he told them. "I
myself only recently went two, and that proved dan-
gerous enough. Now you are talking of a journey of
many seven-days. It cannot be done, I think."

"Why not?" Cohoma objected. "You're not afraid,
are you? Not," he added quickly as Born took a step

46

toward the bigger man, "an exceptional hunter like
yourself?"

Bom relaxed slightly. He had already decided that
of the two giants, he liked the man far the less.

"It is not a question of fear," he told them, "but
of reason. The balance of the world is delicate. Each
creature has its place in that balance, takes what is
needed, and returns what it can. The further one
moves from one's own niche, the more he disrupts
the order of things. When the balance is upset se-
verely, people die."

"I think what he's saying, Jan," Logan said to her
companion, "is that they believe the further they go
•from their home village, the more the chances of suc-
cessfully returning to it are reduced. An understandable
feeling, but the explanation is interesting. I wonder
how they came to that world-view way of thinking. It's
not natural."

"Natural or not," Cohoma objected, "I still don't
see why—"

"Later," she cut him off. He turned away, mutter-
ing to himself. "I think the first thing we should do,"
she suggested, "is get out from under this open space
before a relative of the monster you so smoothly dis-
patched, Born, gets curious and comes round to in-
vestigate."

That was the first sensible thing the giants had said.
He beckoned for them to follow. Cohoma filled his
pockets with small packages from various compart-
ments, then let Bom lead the way into the trees.

Despite the comparative openness of this level and
the absence of accustomed vines and branches, Bom
was startled to see how clumsy the giants were and
how hesitantly they advanced. He inquired about their
obvious difficulty as tactfully as possible and was glad
when neither seemed offended.

"On the world we come from," Logan explained,
"we're used to walking on the ground."

Bom was shocked. "Can it be that you live in
Hellitself?"

"Hell? I don't understand, Bom."
He pointed downward. "Two levels below us lie the
Lower and True Hell, the surface Hell of mud and

47

shifting earth. It is the abode of monsters too hor-
rible to have names, so it is said."

"I understand. No, Bom, our home's not like that.
It's solid and open and light—not full of monsters.
At least," she said with a grin, "not any monsters we
can't live with." Like the Church Bureau of Supra-
Commonwealth Registry, she reflected.

Bern's head was swimming. Everything the giants
said seemed to go against all reason and truth, yet
their very presence and the solid evidence of their
sky craft hinted that yet greater wonders might exist.

For now, though, he must restrain his curiosity in
favor of more immediate concerns. "You both look
tired and hungry, and you must be exhausted by
your ordeal."

Cohoma added a heartfelt "Amen!"

"I will take you to the Home. We can talk further
there, and more easily."

"One .question, Bom," asked Logan. "Are the rest
of your people as receptive to strangers as you are?"

"Think you we are not civilized?" Bom asked. "Any
child knows that a guest is as a brother and must be
so treated."

"A man after my own heart," sighed Cohoma. "I've
got to apologize, friend Bom. I had some wrong ideas
about you, at first. Lead on, short stuff."

Bom pointed upward. "To the Home level first—
a fair climb." Both giants groaned. Judging from what
he had seen of their climbing ability thus far, Bom
could understand their reaction. "I will try to find an
easier route. It will cost us some time—"

"We'll risk it," said Logan.

Bom located a spiraling branch root, descending in
a tight double helix from an air-tree somewhere far
above. They would have several dozen meters of sim-
ple ascent. He started upward, and as he did a scream
sounded behind him. He reached for the snuffler, re-
laxed when he saw it was only Ruumahum. The fear
displayed by the two giants at the sight of the af-
fectionate furcot was amusing.

"It's only Ruumahum," he informed them. "My
furcot. He'd no more harm you than me."

"Persons," grunted Ruumahum sardonically, sniffing
48

first at the waist of a frozen Logan, then Cohoma.
Neither giant moved, relaxing only when that great
fanged head moved away.

"My God," Logan muttered, staring in awe at the
massive form as it bounded into the canopy overhead,
"it talks. That's two sapient forms Survey missed." She
looked at Bom with new respect. "Carnivorous hexa-
pod—how'd you ever tame that?" she asked wonder-
ingly.

Bom considered in confusion, then understanding
dawned. "You mean," he said in amazement, "you
have no furcots of your own?" He looked from a
stupefied Logan to Cohoma.

"Furcots of our own?" echoed Logan. "Why should
we?"

"Why," Bom recited without thinking, "every person
has his furcot and every furcot its person, as every
flitter its blossom, every cubble its anchor tree, every
pfeffermall its resonator. It's the balance of the world."

"Yes, but that still doesn't explain how you tamed
them," pressed Cohoma, staring after the departed
carnivore.

"Tame." Bom's expression twisted. "It's not a ques-
tion of taming. Furcots like persons and we like the
furcots." He shrugged. "It is natural. It has always
been so."

"It talked," noted Logan aloud. "I distinctly heard
it say 'persons.'"

"The furcots are not very bright," Bom admitted,
"but they talk well enough to make themselves under-
stood." He smiled. "There are persons who talk less."

For some reason this caused both giants to launch
into a long discussion between themselves, full of
complex terms Bom did not understand. This made
him uncomfortable. Anyway, it was time they started
Home, time he received the adulation and accolades
due him.

"We must go now, but there is a condition."

That veiled threat was enough to cause the giants
to break off their argument and stare at him. "What
condition?" Logan asked apprehensively.

Bom stared at Cohoma. "That be no longer calls
49

me short stuff. Otherwise I will call him clumsy-cub
every time his foot slips on a pathway."

Cohoma managed a tight smile, but Logan guffawed
openly. "He's got you there, Jan." The latter just
grunted, muttered something about getting on then-
way, and started up the root after Bom. "No time
to waste," he added gruffly.

As they moved upward, Bom considered Cohoma's
last remark. The concept of "wasting time" was per-
sonally intriguing, since in the Home it usually had
been applied only to him. Was it possible there
were others who felt as he did about the way time
was spent? If so, there was another reason for getting
to know these giants better. He already knew of sev-
eral others.

v

The forest had been burned back to leave a clear
zone around the armored, domed station which sat in
the largest open space—for that matter, the only open
space—in the hylaea, a silver-gray bubble rising from

an ocean of green, like the exhalation of a colossal
diver swimming far below.

The circular, domed structure rested on the sheared-
off trunks of three Pillar trees, whose neatly trimmed
branches formed a system of braces and struts as
strong as any artificial supports the builders could
have provided. Eventually the cut-off giant trees would
die and topple over, but by then the station would no
longer be necessary, having been supplanted according
to the master plan by much larger, more permanent
structures built elsewhere.

The cleared zone around the station was designed
to prevent any further deaths from the local saw-
tooth, hook-clawed^ predators, who had killed three of

50

the station's builders before its major defenses were
installed and powered up. Discovering that no creature
of the forest cared to cross an area open to the sky
-and to the sky-bome killers—the construction en-
gineers had burnt back the green ramparts many
meters from the station, as well as several meters
down below its bottom level.

Two occupants of the station had been carried off
by aerial predators while walking along the peripheral
strollway. Again the station's defenses were strength-
ened, until it resembled a small fortress. The lasers
and explosive guns were hardly fitting to a structure
dedicated primarily to research and exploration. The
less lethal instrumentation was located within the gray
building. It was that nexus of inner laboratories that
the wall of weapons was erected to protect.

Scouting parties went out in armed skimmers to
search the endless forest for useful products. They
brought back one revelation after another—the forest
proved to be an inexhaustible source of surprises—
which were metamorphosed into commercial possibil-
ities within the labs. These findings were relayed to
other men who in turn relayed the information to
a deep space beam operator, who by various devious
means—since the presence of the station was illegal,
as it had neither been registered nor inspected nor
officially approved—passed it on to a distant world.
There one man with a machine transcribed the myriad
discoveries into figures, relayed them to a second, who
took them to a third, who laundered them for a
fourth, who laid them carefully on the desk of a person
withered in body but not in mind. That person
-studied the figures. Every so often she would smile
crookedly and nod, and then orders would go back
along the carefully concealed chain of command until
eventually they were disseminated within the dome on
The World With No Name.

So closely guarded was the location of the world
with no name that few of those who worked within
the dome had any idea where it was, and no pilot
was sent to it twice. Pilot relayed information to
successor, for the coordinates could not even be
trusted to mechanical safekeeping. This was chancy

51

since the coordinates could be lost forever, but the
advantage of absolute secrecy made it worthwhile.
Since no one knew its location, no one could divulge
it voluntarily or otherwise to agents of Commonwealth
or Church. Anyone questioned on the subject could
admit freely to what he knew—which was nothing.
The whole operation was very professional.

In the largest of those inner laboratories, the most
intelligent of the station's researchers studied the huge,
ovoid chunk of dark wood that dominated the far
end of the chamber. It had been cut open. This piece
of wood had made all the expense and secrecy and
effort worthwhile, and Wu Tsing-ahn had been work-
ing with it even before the construction of the station
had been completed.

He was a small man, with delicate, tortured fea-
tures and black hair turned prematurely white at odd
places. The private agony which strained his face had
not affected the clarity of his mind, or dulled his
analytical abilities. Like everyone else in the station,
he was aware that his activities on this planet were
not in keeping with the Ordainments of the Church
or Commonwealth law. Most were there for the
money.

Tsing-ahn showed a certain fluttering of the hands,
a twitch of both eyelids. Both were by-products of the
drug which gave great pleasure at great expense.
Tsing-ahn required it now, required it regularly in
large doses. He had been forced to suspend his moral
principles to satisfy the craving. But he didn't care
any more. Besides, the work was not especially dif-
ficult and was intellectually pleasing. There was emo-
tional refuge in that.

There was a knock on the door across the room.
Tsing-ahn acknowledged the knock, and a large man
entered, his slight limp noticeable and unavoidable,
contact lenses reflecting the steady overhead light.
The man was no giant, but each of his biceps was
bigger around than the biochemist's thigh. He wore a
bolstered sidearm, prominently displayed.

"Hello, Nearchose."

"Hello, Doc," the big man responded. He crossed

52

the room, nodded toward the pierced and cut section
of wood. "Found out what makes it tick yet?"

'Tve been reluctant to risk chancing its drug-
producing properties until just now, Nearchose," Wu
replied softly. "Full dissection could destroy that." He
reached out and touched the wood.

Nearchose studied it. "How much you think a burl
that size is gonna be worth. Doc?"

Tsing-ahn shrugged. "How much is a doubled life-
span worth to a man, Nearchose?" He gazed at the
burl with something more than scientific detachment.
"I'd guess a burl this size would yield enough extract
to double the life-span of anywhere from two to
three hundred people—not to mention what it will do
for general health and well-being. No price has been
put on the drug yet since it hasn't been exported ex-
cept in small, experimental doses. The proteins have
proven complex beyond belief. Synthetic production
appears out of the question. Dissection may offer
clues as to further lines of research." He looked up.
"What would you pay for it, Nearchose?"

"Who, me?" The security guard smiled a crooked
smile, showing metal teeth, which had replaced ones
that had not been lost naturally. "I'll die when my
natural time comes, Doc. A man like me ... I
couldn't ever afford the stuff. I'd give or do any-
thing for it, of course, if I thought I could get away
with it."

Tsing-ahn nodded. "Far wealthier men will do like-
wise." He winked. "Maybe I'll slip you a vial of the
next batch. How would that appeal to you, Near-
chose?"

The guard's genial manner faded. He looked sol-
emnly down at his friend, whom he could break with
one hand. "Don't tease me Hke that, Doc. It's not
funny. To live a couple of hundred years in good
health, instead of decomposing into pieces at seventy,
maybe eighty . . . Don't tease me with stuff like that."

"Sorry, Nick. It's a defense mechanism with me.
I've got my own hurts, you know. It's small and
mean, but I fight back in these ways."

Nearchose nodded. He knew of the biochemist's
addiction, of course. Everyone at the station did. The

53

brilliant researcher Tsing-ahn was deficient in body,
though he was not crippled or broken. Nearchose was
deficient in mind, though he was neither stupid nor
ignorant. Each recognized his superiority over others
of his own kind at the station, so the friendship that
sprung up between them was one between equals.

"I've got outside patrol this shift," Nearchose an-
nounced, turning to leave. "I was just curious to see
how everything's going, that's all."

"Surely, Nick. Come in anytime."

After the big man had left for his patrol duty,
Tsing-ahn set up his instruments for the first full dis-
section of the invaluable burl. The operation could
be put off no longer, despite the fact that this was
the only burl of its kind found so far. Others would
be located by the scout teams, he was certain. It
was merely a question of time.

When extract from the burl's center was given
casually to an experimental carew, the results were
unexpected, astonishing, overwhelming. Instead of two
days, the hyperactive mammal had lived for nearly
a week. He had repeated the experiment twice, not
believing his own results. When they were confirmed
the third time, he had announced his discovery to
Hansen, the station director. The reaction of those
funding the project had been predictable: More burls
must be found. But exploring by skimmer was er-
ratic and difficult. Land parties had been sent out, but
they had been discontinued by Hansen despite com-
plaints from above. Too many parties, no matter
how heavily armed, had failed to return.

Tsing-ahn was still fascinated by the fact that this
unhealthy protrusion of the tree might prove more
useful than the tree itself. He thought of ancient Ter-
ran whales and ambergris. He was extremely anxious
to study the internal structure of the burl. It had a
softish, center, according to long probes, quite unlike
most burls, which were solid hardwood. And there
was other evidence of a unique inner construction.

He worked at the dissection for several days, saw-
ing and probing and cutting open. At the end of that
time, a most unnatural and horrible scream shattered
54

the peace of the station and sent people running from
their posts to the laboratory of Wu Tsing-ahn.

Nearchose was the first one there. This time he
didn't ask permission to enter, but wrenched the door
open, breaking the bolt. To his enormous surprise,
Tsing-ahn stood facing him and looked up at him
calmly. One hand was trembling slightly and an eyelid
flickered, but that was only normal.

A crowd had gathered behind Nearchose. He turned,
shooed them away. "Nothing to see. Everything's okay.
The Doc had a bigger bad-dream than he's used to,
that's all."

"You sure. Nick?" someone asked hesitantly.

"Sure, Maria. I'll handle it." The crowd dribbled
away muttering among themselves as Nearchose
closed the broken door.

"What's the trouble. Nick? Why the indelicate en-
trance?"

The guard turned to him, studied the man whom
he often did not understand, but whom he unfailingly
respected. "That was you that screamed, Doc." It
wasn't a question.

Tsing-ahn nodded. "That was me, yes. Nick." He
looked away. "I'm flying on my morning dose and
... I thought I saw something. I don't have your
mental resilience, Nick, and I'm afriad I let it get a
hold of me for a second. Sorry if it disturbed every-
one."

"Sure, yeah," Nearchose finally replied. "Worried
about you, that's all. Everyone does, you know."

"Sure, yeah," Tsing-ahn echoed bitterly.

Nearchose fidgeted uneasily in the silence, looked
past the scientist toward the far end of the lab. "How's
the work coming?"

Tsing-ahn answered absently, his mind obviously
elsewhere. "Well. Better than one might expect. Yes,
quite well. I should have some definite announcements
to make in a couple of days."

"That's great. Doc." Nearchose turned to go,
paused. "Listen, Wu, if you need anything, anything
you'd rather not go through channels for . . ."

Tsing-ahn smiled faintly. "Of course, Nick. You'll
be the first one I turn to."

55

The security guard grinned reassuringly and closed
the door quietly behind him. Tsing-ahn returned to
his work. He proceeded calmly once more and with
his accustomed efficiency.

Nothing else disturbed the tranquility of the station
until that evening, when a passerby thought he smelled
something unusual in the corridor outside the lab.
Following the odor led to visual confirmation—dark
wisps of smoke issuing from the cracks around Wu's
laboratory door. The man yelled "Fire!" and hit the
nearest all-purpose station alarm.

This time others reached the lab well ahead of
Nearchose. He had to work his way through the
personnel who were putting out the last pockets of
flame. Containment had been achieved before the
blaze could spread beyond the confines of the lab,
but the lab itself was a complete wreck. The fire had
been brief, but intense. Not only was there plenty of
flammable material within the lab, but Tsing-ahn had
apparently utilized white phosphorous on stubborn
materials and acids on anything that refused to ignite.
The little biochemist had been as methodical in de-
struction as he had been in research.

Everyone clustered around the few charred scraps
of wood that were scattered around the back of the
lab. They were all that remained of the burl which
had been worth untold millions. Nearchose's main
concern lay elsewhere, so it was he who first found
the body sprawled under a table across the room. At
first he assumed the scientist had died of smoke in-
halation, since there were no marks on his body. Then
he rolled him over and the white cap slid off. Near-
chose saw the needier still clutched convulsively in one
hand, saw the tiny holes of equal diameter on both
the front and back of the skull. He knew what a
needier did, knew he could slip a pencil neatly through
that hole.

The man's eyes were closed and his expression, for
the first time that Nearchose could remember, was
content.

Nearchose stood up. The pitiable, weak genius below
him had run across something that had impelled him
to his own death. Nearchose had no idea what that
56

thing might be and was not sure he would care to
know. No man is perfect. An old sergeant had first
repeated that cliche to him. For all his brilliance,
Tsing-ahn had been less perfect than most. A scrap
of note here, a page of book there were all that

had survived.

Employed at the station were a lesser biochemist
named Celebes and a botanist named Chittagong. To-
gether they did not quite make up one Tsing-ahn,
but they were the best Hansen had. They were
taken off their projects of the moment, and given the
carefully gathered bits of paper and scraps of note-
book, and ordered to undertake the reconstruction of
Tsing-ahn's work. Eventually, a second burl of the
type carbonized in the fire was located and brought
back. It was presented to Chittagong and Celebes,
who worked with it, while newly installed security
monitors watched constantly, checking everything
from the scientists' heartbeats to the growls in their
stomachs. Both men were less than enthusiastic about
the project, especially concerning the manner of their
comrade's death. However, the orders came down
from an enraged person at a large desk many parsecs
away. They were not to be disputed.

Nearchose returned to his duties. He sat at his
gimbal post and brooded on what there was in a
simple hunk of wood that impelled someone as ra-
tional as Tsing-ahn to go off the deep end. Such
things happened, and he need not concern himself
with them. But he could not help it.

He sighed, and forced himself to turn his gaze and
attention to the surrounding wall of forest.

God damn, but he was sick of green.

57

VI

"Ouch!"

Born stopped, looked back at his charges. Logan
was hopping awkwardly on one foot on the cubble,
holding a trailing liana for support. Bom let go of
the vine-root he was holding and dropped next to
her. She sat down, holding her left leg. She seemed
more angry than hurt. Cohoma was studying some-
thing Logan was concealing with a hand.

"What is it?"

She smiled up at him. Beads of sweat were begin-
ning to form on her forehead. "I stepped on some-
thing." She looked around, gestured. "That flower
there ... went right through my boot."

Bom saw the tiny collection of bright orange thorns
sticking up from the middle of the miniature bou-
quet of six-petaled lavender blooms. His expression
changed. A hand reached under his cloak and he
brought out the bone blade.

"Hey!" Cohoma started to move between them.
Bom shoved the bigger man aside. Cohoma stumbled
and nearly fell off the cubble.

"Lie down!" Bom instructed Logan harshly, put-
ting a hand on her chest and shoving. She went down,
hard, then started to sit up slightly, bracing herself
with her hands.

"Bom what are you doing? It stings a little, but—"

He yanked the boot off and she fell backward
again, hitting her head on the wood. Then he raised
her leg and held the knife over it.

"Now wait a minute, Bom!" Her voice turned
panicky. Cohoma had recovered his footing, took a
threatening step toward the hunter.

"Just a second, you misplaced pygmy. Explain—"
58

There was a warning growl just overhead and he
looked up. Ruumahum was leaning over the cubble
just above him, holding on with four legs, the front
paws dangling and claws extended. The furcot
smiled, showing more ivory than a concert grand.
Cohoma looked into three eyes and clenched his fists,
but kept them at his side.

"This will hurt a little," Bom said quickly. He cut
into the sole of her foot, directly over the three punc-
tures.

Logan screamed violently, fell back and tried to

twist free. Holding her foot tightly, Bom put his
mouth over the freely bleeding wound, sucked and
spat, sucked and spat. When he finished, she was
crying softly and trembling. After a cautious glance
at Ruumahum, Cohoma moved to comfort her.

Bom ignored the giant's tense questions while
searching the surrounding foliage. He found what he
needed, a cluster of herbaceous cylinders growing from
a nearby limb. Finding an old one, he cut it off at
the base. It was half the length of his arm. The knife
took the top off, revealing a hollow tube filled with
clear liquid. He drained it, sighed, and tried another
one. This he offered to the injured woman. Logan
finished rubbing at her eyes, stared at him.

"Drink it," he advised simply. She started to take
it and recoiled at the feel of the mushy stem. Then
she put her lips hesitantly to the rim and drained half
of it, despite Cohoma's warnings. She passed the
remainder to him.

Cohoma studied it warily. "How do we know he's
not trying to poison us?"

"If he wanted to kill us," she sighed, "he could
have left us for the flying meat-eater, Jan. Don't be
a fool. There's nothing harmful in it." Cohoma sipped
at it reluctantly, but finished what was left.

"Your foot . . . how does it feel?" Bom inquired
solicitously. Logan drew her knee up, pulled it in to
where she could see the bottom. The wound was not
as deep as she had feared, certainly not as deep as
it had felt when Bom was cutting it. It was already
beginning to heal. Around the multiple punctures,
though, the skin had turned a dull red.
59

"Like someone took a knife to it," she shot back.
"How should it feel?"

"You feel nothing besides the cut?" Born pressed.

She considered. "A slight tingle, maybe, around
where I stepped on the thorns . . . like when your
foot goes to sleep. But that's all."

"Tingle," Bom said thoughtfully. He started search-
ing the brush again. Both giants watched him curi-
ously. He paused before one plant, then plucked a
pale yellow fruit from a branch far above, where it
hung in neat clusters of three. "Eat this," he instructed
Logan when he rejoined them again.

She examined it doubtfully. Of all the fruits and
edible vegetation Born had introduced to them, this
appeared the most formidable. It was shaped like a
squat barrel, with brown riblike extrusions running
around its circumference. "Skin and all?"

"Skin and all," Bom said, nodding, "and quickly.
It will be better for you."

She brought it to her mouth. So much of the fo-
liage on this world was deceptive—maybe this tough-
looking specimen would have a ... then she bit into
it. Her face screwed up in disgust. "It tastes," she
told Cohoma, "like spoiled cheese seasoned with vin-
egar. What happens," she asked Born appealingly, "if
I don't finish this thing?"

"I believe—I think, I got all of the poison out of
your system. If not, you have a few moments left
before the remaining poison spreads to your nervous
system and kills you. Unless it is countered by the
antitoxin in fruit."

Logan finished the yellow pulp with speed that
belied her nausea. Still, she found time to wonder at
how words like "antitoxin" and terms like "nervous
system" had lasted in these people's vocabulary down
through the years of their fall from knowledge. Un-
doubtedly, she reflected, these expressions were con-
stantly used in this ever-threatening environment. As
she reached this conclusion, her eyes widened, her
cheeks bulged, and she turned and retched with such
violence that Born and Cohoma had to move fast
to keep her heaving body from falling off the cubble.
Minutes later she was lying on her back gasping for

60

air and running a forearm slowly across her mouth.

"Holy orders!" she wheezed. "I feel like I've been
turned inside out." She put both hands to her ab-
domen and felt around gently. "Still there—you could
have bet me it wasn't."

Bom ignored her gasps and complaints. "How does
your foot feel now?"

"Still tingles a little."

"Just your foot?" he persisted, staring intently at
her. "Not your ankle, or your lower leg, here?" He
touched her calf. She shook her head. Bom grunted,
got to his feet. "Good. If your leg tingled, the poi-
son would have spread past my ability to halt it.
Then it would have been too late. But you will be
all right, now."

She nodded and started to get to her feet with
Cohoma's help. Then she stared sharply at Bom.
"Hey—if it was so vital that I eat that fruit right
away, Bom, why did you hesitate before picking it
and bringing it down? According to what you just said,
I could have died in the interim."

The hunter stared back at her with the patient look
one reserves for very young children. "I had to be sure
the tesshanda would not object to my taking its fruit,
since it was not yet quite ripe."

Both Logan and Cohoma appeared confused. "Are
you saying," she went on, "that you had to ask that
plant's permission? That you talked to it?"

"I did not say that," Bom explained easily. "I
emfoledit."

"Emfoled? Oh, you mean you felt the fruit to see
if it was ripe—enfolded it."

Bom shook his head. "No . . . emfoled. You do
not emfol with your plants?"

"I guess not, since I've no idea what you're talking
about, Bom."

He looked satisfied without being pleased. "Ah,
that explains much."

"Not to me, it doesn't," Cohoma replied. "Look,
Bom, are you saying you talked or conversed with
that plant and that it gave you an okay to pick a
fruit before it was ripe?"

61




"No, no, I emfoled it. If the fruit was ripe, I
would not have had to, of course."

"Why of course?" Logan asked, feeling the con-
versation growing steadily more tenuous.

"Because then the tesshanda would have emfoled

me.

"Some kind of ritual superstition," she muttered.
"The logic trappings are intriguing. Wonder where it
sprang from? Give me a hand up, Jan." He did so
and she immediately winced, bent over and held her
stomach.

"Can you walk?" Born inquired, still patient.

"No, but I'm an accomplished stumbler." She forced
a sickly grin. "Talk about the cure being worse than
the disease ... I don't think you'd make it as a
Commonwealth physician, van Born, but this is the
second time you've saved my life. Thanks."

"Third time," Bom told her without explaining.
"We are near to the Home, now. Another half-level
up and two or three levels distant." Both giants
groaned.

"I've never seen a tree like that, not on Survey or
in any of the other reports," Cohoma announced when
they had their first sight of the Home.

"You haven't been keeping up, Jan," his partner
admonished. "The next to the last eastward skimmer
brought back the details on it. It's called a weaver.
The central trunk hardly narrows at all till it attains
the five- or six-hundred-meter level. Then it splits
and resplits into an interlocking maze of trunklets
that form a ... well ... a kind of enormous
central basket in the tree. Then the subtrunks re-
combine a few dozen meters higher to form a single
bole again that reaches all the way to the forest top.
According to the report the branches of the trunklet
cage are lined with a red fruit, mostly sugar pulp
around a nutlike center, that's about as rich in nour-
ishment components as anything found locally so far
—and rich in niacin, of all things." She pointed as
they neared the first trunklets and walked along a
thick tuntangcle. "See those pods growing from the
pink blossoms? According to the report, if you brush

62

against one, you get a face full of pollen. If you
breathe that stuff, it's good-bye, according to the lab
analysis. Fungal spores settle in the lungs and esopha-
gus, spread instantly and choke you inside two min-
utes."

She was suddenly aware that Bom showed no sign

of swerving from the deadly flower-sprouting vines.
"We're going around this tree, aren't we, Bom?
There can't be a poison here your people don't know

about."

"Go around?" Bom eyed her oddly. "This tree is

the Home." He approached the tangle of flower-laden

vines and branchlets.

"Bom . . ." She followed him slowly, her eyes on

the deadly pods. One touch would send a shower of

suffocating pollen into the air.

Bom stopped at the first vine, leaned over, and
spat directly into one of the broad blooms, avoiding
the swollen pod. A shiver appeared to pass through
the vine as the glistening petals closed on themselves.
The shiver continued. Then, like a twig curling back
from flame, the vines tightened, retracted on them-
selves, revealing a clear path through the brambles.

"Quickly now," Bom urged, starting between the

passage.

A streak of emerald lightning shot past the two giants
as they began to follow. Ruumahum had not waited
for them to make up their minds. When they were
through and safe, both turned to watch the tension
slip out of the vines. They relaxed, once again bar-
ring the way as effectively as a duralloy wall.

"Remarkable," Cohoma murmured. He questioned
Bom as they strode deeper into the heart of the
Home-tree. "What would happen, Bom, if I were to

spit in one of the flowers?"

"Nothing," the hunter told him. "You are not of
the Home. The Home recognizes only its own."

"I don't see how—" he began, but Logan was al-
ready analyzing the possibilities.

"Tell me, Bom," she asked, "do your people eat

the fruit of the weaver—the Home?"

Born looked back at her, aghast. At times these
giants seemed to possess knowledge beyond imagin-
63




ing; at other times, they. could be incredibly stupid.

"Is there anything better to eat except perhaps
fresh meat?" He had heard Logan's recital of the
Survey report on the weaver, but had not understood.
"Why would we not eat of what is so readily pro-
vided for us?"

"Interesting," Logan agreed. Then she again began
using words of no meaning to Born and he willingly
ignored their conversation. "You see the connection
yet, Jan?"

Her companion nodded. "I think so. They eat the
tree's fruit on a regular basis; it's their staple food.
Chemicals from the fruit mass in their system. When
they spit into one of the flowers, chemicals from the in-
gested fruit are included in the saliva. No wonder the
Home recognizes its own!"

"I can see what's in it for the people," Logan
confessed. "Food and shelter. What, if anything, does
the tree get out of it?"

Their musings were interrupted by a shout, then
another, and another. Soon they were surrounded by
a group of goggling children—perfectly normal chil-
dren in every way, if one discounted the predominance
of deep brown skin, hair, and green eyes, plus their
shortness. The youngsters eyed the two giants with
the kind of awe they would have reserved for a pink
furcot.

Din was there, too. He fell in step alongside Bom.
Puffing out his thin chest, he matched the hunter
stride for stride, except for an occasional skip needed
to keep up. Bom muttered an indifferent greeting to
the boy. Would the youth never cease pestering him?

Muf tagged along behind his person, his presence
unusual for a furcot. Normally he would have been
off with his brethren somewhere in the trunklets, sleep-
ing. The cub nosed his way through the group of chil-
dren and sniffed questioningly at Logan. She shied
away at first, then reached out and hesitantly patted
the cub on the head. A low rumble began to sound
from somewhere deep within the six-legged ball of fur.
The cub edged closer to Logan, nearly knocking her
over.

A streamlined, rippling green shape was alongside

64

her in a second. "If cub troubles, slap," Ruumahum
advised Logan in his rumbling bass.

She gazed down at the cub, who was staring up at
her with worshipful multiple eyes. "Slap him—certainly
not!" she objected. "He's only being affectionate."

Ruumahum snorted derisively, padded on ahead.

This unlikely parade—one person, two furcots, a
gaggle of softly chattering children, and two giants—
finally came to a halt by the side of the central leaf-
leather pavilion.

Bom's gaze swept over the surrounding homes.
Somewhere an adult furcot yawned loudly. No crowd
came running from the half-open doorways. No covey
of adolescent girls hurried to feel his arms and torso
and to make cooing sounds. No hunters arrived to
study his giants with the awe the children had shown.
There was no praise, no admiring compliments, no
adulation or expressions of proper commendation for
his courage and boldness—only the curious stares of
a few oldsters peeping out from behind leafleather
doorways.

Something hit Bom at the back of his knees, and
he fell forward, landing in a puddle of stagnant
night-water. Muf scrambled and hid among the chil-
dren. They laughed delightedly. Getting slowly to his
feet, Bom tried to regain his dignity while shaking the
water free from the cloak. The laughter continued. He
turned and yelled at them. They drew back slightly,
but the smiles did not entirely vanish. He took a step
toward the nearest child, his hand going threateningly
to his knife. This time they scattered, naked brown
bodies darting nimbly into the doorways of homes,
or behind ridges and humps in the wooden paving of
the square. Bom found he was breathing hard. His
capacity for making a fool of himself seemed limitless.

"Not quite the reception you hoped for, hmmm?"
Cohoma ventured with surprising sympathy. "I know
exactly how you feel. I've experienced the same lack
of appreciation myself." He shot a significant glance
at Logan that she missed.

All at once the anger flowed out of the hunter,
and he relaxed somewhat, feeling at the same time an
unexpected sense of kinship to this strange man who
65

claimed to travel the Upper Hell in a boat made of
axe metal.

"Where is everyone, anyway?" Logan wondered.

Born just shrugged and led them on toward his own
vestibule, located high in the trunklets at the far end
of the Home cage. "Gathering fruit, caring for the
Home..."

"Parasite control," Cohoma murmured to Logan.
"One point for the tree. Better the human parasite you
know than the unreasonable animal or plant you
don't."

"Symbiote, not parasite," Logan countered. "Both
tree and man benefit. I wonder, though, what the
weaver trees did for protection before Bom's ances-
tors made them their home."

". . . or hunting, perhaps," Bom concluded, ignor-
ing their whispers. "All will return before the night
comes." He smiled to himself. He could still count on
Brightly Go's reaction when he introduced the giants
to the council tonight.

Bora's own living quarters elicited more peculiar
words from the giants. "See," Logan went on, indicat-
ing the walls and ceiling, "the smaller branches and
vines grow so close together here that it's a simple
matter to close off the remaining space with woven
material."

Cohoma murmured agreement, sat down and ran a
finger along the smooth wood of the floor. An idea
was forming that he needed additional proof to con-
firm. Bom gave it to him when he explained the func-
tion of a circular crevice in the floor located near the
back of the big room.

"I just wonder," he mumbled aloud, "who has
adapted to whom, here—man to tree, or tree to man?
Maybe nothing lived in the weavers before the colo-
nists discovered them. But I don't understand how
such detailed, specialized interdependence could have
developed in a few generations."

Logan considered silently. Bom eyed the two of
them without understanding as they continued to talk
between themselves. What did they mean, man adapt
to tree or tree to man? The Home was the Home. It
was only sensible that a man should take care of his

66

dwelling. What was it like, he wondered, on the world
Where these giants came from, that they found the nat-
ural order of things here so astonishing? He did not
think he would care for it. Then a freak thought
struck him-freak, because it seemed so impossible.

"Can it be," he said, the incredulity plain in his
voice, "that on your world there is nothing that

grows?"

"No," Logan corrected, "there's much that grows,
but nothing we live in, as you do. But we use our
growing things, as your people do."

"Use? I don't understand, Kimilogan."

She settled herself back against a branch. "Some
plants we eat the fruit of, others we make into foods
we can eat, some we still, but rarely, use in the build-
ing of our homes. Some we use for medicinal pur-
poses, as you did the tesshanda. We use the forest
world much as you do."

"I still do not understand," Bom said. "We do not
use the forest. We are a part of the forest, the
world. We are part of a cycle that cannot be broken.
We no more use the forest than the forest uses us."
Cohoma murmured something unintelligible at that.

"Your people serve this tree," Logan explained
slowly, "even if you don't realize it. You're its ser-
vants, in a sense."

"Servants." Bom thought hard, spread his hands
helplessly. "What is a servant?"

"Someone who performs a service at the bidding of
another," she explained.

Madder and madder! Truly the giants had spells of
idiocy, Bom mused. "We do not serve the tree, the
Home. The Home serves us."

Logan eyed him a little sadly, then she looked over
at Cohoma. "They don't understand, all right. Probably
wouldn't want to.

"And why not?" Cohoma added. "They seem per-
fectly happy with the arrangement."

"It ties them down mentally, though," she coun-
tered. "With shelter and basic food provided by nature,
there's neither reason nor motivation to regain the
knowledge they've lost. We'll have trouble trying to
re-educate them. Tell me, Bom," she asked gently,
67

turning to him as he laid out a meal of fruit, nuts, and
dried grazer meat, "would you ever consider leaving
your tree?"

Born was so shocked he stood momentarily frozen.
"Leave the Home? You mean, forever? Not to
come back?" She nodded.

That confirmed the giants' madness. Why would
anyone even think of leaving the Home? Here
was shelter, food, companionship, security and pro-
tection from the unpredictable jungle outside. Away
from the Home lay only uncertainty and eventual
death.

Then he understood the reason, and it explained
many of the giants' strange words. "I see," he told
them as gently as possible. "I truly did not under-
stand before. It is evident that you have no Home of
your own."

"We have homes," Cohoma shot back. "Mine would
overwhelm you, Bom. It does what I tell it to, offers
food when I wish it, and I come and go from it as
I please."

"You do not have to care for it?"

"Well, yes, but-"

Logan's chuckle cut him off. "He's got you there,
Jan."

Cohoma looked upset. "Not at all. I can leave any-
time I want, for as long as I want, without worrying
about it. But these people can't."

"That is not a Home, then," Bom argued. "One
cares for a Home, and one's Home cares for its own."

"Well, it's my home," Cohoma grumbled, sampling
a spiral nut from the cluster spread before him. It
offered a faint flavor of pepper and celery. He took
a second.

"I see," Born replied. He was too polite to add what
he knew. Though there had been no talk of material
construction, of artificial abodes, Bom knew that the
giants' homes were not living, but were dead things,
rotten with indifference. For all their wonders, Bom
would not live in a dead thing, dead like the axe. You
could not emfol a dead thing.

Thoughts of axes and the waning daylight reminded
him that the hunters and gatherers would soon return.

68

He would present the giants to them then and perhaps
someone would finally venture to say that the hunter
Bom was a bit more daring and brave and worthy

than the average hunter.

As he sat and ate and composed what he would
say, he noticed toes below the leafleather doorway. He
got to his feet, shoved the partition aside. Din jerked
back, startled, but Bom was too preoccupied with the
anticipation of his own triumph to be angry. Instead,
he invited the boy in to eat, putting a foot in the
face of the cub Muf when it tried to follow. The
cub whimpered, but stayed outside. Bom found some
food for the youth and the orphan consumed it ea-
gerly.

So much for his audience: an orphan child and

two giants afflicted with inherent insanities. He bit
angrily into a tough slab of meat.

"A number of colony transports," Cohoma explained
to the wary but politely attentive audience gathered
around the evening Home fire, "were reported lost,
sometimes in a natural disaster, sometimes through a
careless shift in records by an incompetent clerk."
He swallowed, aware he was treading on quasire-
ligious grounds. "It seems likely," he continued, stress-
ing the word likely, "that you people are descended
from the survivors of one such ship and are trapped
here. Though considering the inimical nature of this
world I find it incredible that any of the misplaced
colonists were able to survive after the initial supplies
were exhausted." He sat down again. "That's our best

guess, anyway."

No one seated around the evening blaze said any-
thing. Cohoma and Logan eyed their shorter, better
armed cousins a mite apprehensively.

"All this," Chief Sand finally responded slowly, "may
be as you say." Both giants relaxed visibly. "But
while we have not the benefit of your peculiar
knowledge, we have explanations of our own for our

existence."

He glanced over at Reader and nodded. The
shaman rose. He was clad in his ceremonial raiment
of spotted gildver fur, brilliant brown and red with
69

orange stripes, and the feathered headdress wrought
,from moltings drifted down from the Upper Hell. And
the axe, of course, which he brandished prominently
as he rose. Swinging it like a conductor's baton, he
told the story of how the world happened.

"In the beginning there was the seed," Reader in-
toned solemnly. The people listened reverently. They
had heard the legend a thousand times, yet it still
commanded their attention. "And not a very big seed
at that," the shaman continued. "One day the thought
of water descended, and the seed took root in the wood
of emfol." That word again, Logan mused. "It grew.
Its trunk became strong and tall. Whereupon it put
out many branches. Some of these formed the Pillars
which dominate the world. Others changed and be-
came the two hells which envelop the world. Then
buds appeared, buds uncounted, blooming. We are
the offspring of one such bud, the furcots another,
the peeper that lies still in the hyphae yet another.
The seed prospers, the world prospers, we prosper."

Cohoma held his knees up and together. "If that's
so, and if you believe we come from a planet different
from this one, how does all that fit into your uni-
verse?"

"The branches of the seed tree spread far," Reader
replied. There were appreciative murmurs from the
circle.

"What if one of your branches was transplanted to
another part of this tree?"

"It would die. Each blossom knows its place on its
branch."

"Then you can understand our situation," Cohoma
went on. "The same is true with us. If we don't
return to our particular branch—or seed, or home,
or station—we will surely die, too. Won't you help
us? We would do as much for you."

Logan and Cohoma did their best to appear indif-
ferent while the villagers discussed the situation among
themselves. Someone threw another rotted section of
log onto the fire. It blazed higher, tossing off angry
sparks, slim smoke trails rising lazily to curl skyward
around the edges of the leafleather canopy. Warm
rain dripped down through the smoke.

70

Sand, Joyla, and Reader conferred in whispers. Fi-
nally, Sand raised a hand and the muttering subsided.

"We will help you return to your branch station,
your Home," he announced in a strong voice that
sounded as if it came from a distant loudspeaker and
not that thin frame. "If it is possible."

Born held his place in the inner circle and stared
groundward so his smile would not be visible to the
chief or to Reader or to any of his fellows. He could
hardly wait for their response when they found out
how far away this precious station of the visitors ac-
tually was.

No one laughed when Logan told them.

"Such a journey is unthought of," Sand announced
when Logan had concluded. "No, impossible, impos-
sible. I cannot direct anyone to accompany you, can-
not."

"But didn't I make it clear?" Logan said pleadingly,
scrambling to her feet and gazing anxiously around at
the silent brown faces. "If we don't get back to our
station we'll . . . we'll wither, wither and die. We'll—"

The chief cut her off with a calming hand. "I said
I could not direct anyone to accompany you. This
is so. I would not order any hunter to undertake such
a journey, but if one wished to go with you . . ."

"This is foolish talk," the gatherer Dandone com-
mented from her place. "No one would return alive
from such a trek. There are tales of places where
the Lower and Upper Hells are joined and the world
stops."

"You confuse bravery and foolishness," Joyla coun-
tered. "A foolish person is merely one who does brave
things without thought. Would not any among us risk
her life to return to the Home from a far place, no
matter the distance or hazards? And would we not
seek help from whomever we found ourselves
among?" She looked over at the giants. "If these peo-
ple are like us, they will go despite our entreaties
and warnings. Perhaps we have some among us
brave enough to go with them. I am no hunter, so I
cannot."

"K I were a young man," Sand added, "I would
go, despite the dangers."

71

But you are young no longer. Born thought to him-
self.

"But since I am young no longer," the chief con-
tinued, "I cannot. Let this not restrain others, those
among you who may be eager to go."

He stared around at the assembly, as did Cohoma
and Logan, as did the men and women, as did the
wide-eyed children who peered inward from behind
shoulders and heads and between calves. No one
stepped forward. The only sounds were the brisk
crackle of dead wood in the fire, the soft, indif-
ferent murmur of falling rain. Before he had time to
think it out, Bom found himself saying, "I will go
with the giants."

Innumerable stares of varying intent and intensity
pinned him in his place. Now, at last, he hoped for
some show of admiration and appreciation. Instead,
those stares held sadness and pity. Even the two
giants gazed on him with expressions of satisfaction
and relief, but not of adulation. Bitterly he reflected
how that might change in the many seven-days ahead.

"The hunter Bom will accompany the giants," Sand
noted. "Will any others?" Bom looked around at his
friends. There was stirring within the inner circle, but
it came from men finding excuses to study the ground
before them, to feel the warmth of the fire, to examine
the seams in the leafleather canopy overhead—any-
thing but meet his eyes.

Very well. He would go alone with the giants, and
he alone would learn their secrets. "Possibly," he said
coldly, getting to his feet, "it would not be too much
to ask for some to see to the provisioning of our
party." Then he turned and stalked out of the gather-
ing, back toward his bower. As he did so, he thought
he heard someone murmur, "Why waste good food
on those already dead?" More likely, he had imag-
ined it; nevertheless, he did not stop to find out.

Successful hunts, the killing of the grazer—all had
brought him nothing. When he alone of all the hunters
had been brave enough to descend to the giants'
sky-boat he had gained only the accolades of chil-
dren. Now he would do something so overawing, so
72

incredible, that none would be able to ignore him any
longer. He would take the giants to their station-Home
and return, or he would die. Maybe that would make
them realize his worth, if this time he failed to return.
They would be sorry then.

In his anger, he stumbled on a protruding rootlet
and turned furiously to hurl imprecations at his
thoughtless enemy. It made him feel a little better.
The central fire was well behind him now, and the
darkness snuggled close around him. He pulled his
cloak down over his head to shield himself from the
rain.

If the giants felt they could reach their mysterious
station, then why should he not feel as confident? Why
not indeed, unless...

What if there were no station? What if these two
giants were imps of the Lower Hell sent here to tempt
him to stray from the Home?

Bah, nonsense! They were as human as he, despite
their great size and strange garb. How else could it
be that they spoke the same language of man? Though
what strange modulations and phrasings they used!
And they did not emfol. Bom could not conceive of a
person who could not emfol, so he conveniently forgot
about it-
He parted the leafleather dooring and entered his
home, closed it carefully behind him. Untying his
cloak, he slung it into a far comer. A muffled sound
came from the darkness. Immediately he crouched,
the bone knife jumping reflexively from belt to hand.
A dim figure whimpered. Moving carefully in the
blackness, he brought out the little packet of incendi-
ary pollen, sprinkled it over the pile of deadwood in
the center of the floor. A touch, and the wood coughed
and blazed, revealing the huddled form of Brightly
Go.

Relaxing, he replaced the knife in its sheath. After
a curious glance at the girl, he sat down beside the
fire and crossed his legs. Its yellow-bright depths were
soothing, friendly, undemanding. They would leave
tomorrow, the giants and he, and he would have liked
a long, quiet sleep but...

73

"You come to laugh at me like the others," he
muttered, without rancour.

"Oh, no!" She crawled timidly toward the fire. The
light made olivine patterns deep in her eyes, and Born
found the attraction of the fire waning steadily. "You
know my feelings. Born."

He huffed, turned nervously away. "Losting you like,
Losting you love—me, I amuse you!"

"No, Bom," she protested, her voice rising. "I like
Losting, yes, but ... I like you as well. Losting is
nice, but not nearly so nice as you. Not nearly."
She looked at him imploringly. "I don't want you to
do this thing. Born. If you go with the giants you'll
never come back. I believe what everyone says about
the dangers so far from Home and what is whispered
about the places where the two hells come together."

"Stories, legends," Bom grumbled. "Cub tales. The
dangers far from the Home are no different than they
are a spear's throw from this room. Nor do I believe
there is a place where the two hells join. But if there is,
we will go around it or through it."

She moved around the fire on hands and knees, to
sidle close and put one hand on his shoulder. "For me,
Bom, don't go with the giants."

Looking at her, he started to lean close, started
to agree, started to give in. Then the thing that drove
him to lie in wait for grazers and to go down into
the depths of wells reached out, interceded, crossed
him up. Instead of saying, "I'll do whatever you
desire. Brightly Go, for the love of you," he whispered
huskily, "I've given my word and said before the
whole tribe I will go. And even had I not, I will do
this thing."

Her hand slid from his shoulder. She half-mumbled,
"Bom, I don't want you to," then bent over and
kissed him before he could draw away. Then she was
on her feet and out the door before he could react.
The night-rain swallowed her up.

He was silent a long time, thinking, as the fire
consumed itself and the tepid drops trickled off leaf-
leather roof. Then he mumbled something there was
no one to hear, rolled back onto his sleeping fur, and
drifted off to a troubled, dream-filled slumber.

74

Ruumahum's left eye opened halfway, cocked side-
ways. A dark bulk stood on the branch by his resting
crevice. He coughed, shook droplets from his muzzle,
and snorted in the sibilant rumbling way of the furcot.

"Where is your person, cub?"

Muf jerked his head, in imitation of the human
gesture, down toward the cluster of enclosed branches
below. "Somewhere there, asleep."

"As you should be, nuisance." The eye closed, and
Rnumahum rearranged his massive head on his fore-
paws.

Muf hesitated before blurting out, "Old one, please?"

Ruumahum let out a furcot sigh and lifted his head
slightly to face the cub, all three eyes open this time.
The cub dropped his head and eyed the village
sleeping below.

"My person, the boy Din, is troubled."

"All persons are troubled," Ruumahum replied. "Go
to sleep."

"He fears for his half-father, the person Bom. Your
person."

"There is no blood attachment," the big furcot
mumbled, dropping his head down again. "The cub-
person's emotional reaction is unreasonable."

"All cub-persons' reactions are unreasonable. I fear
this time my person's reaction is reasonable."

Ruumahum's eyebrows rose. "Offspring of an ac-
cident, can it be that you enter into wisdom?"

"I fear," the cub continued, "the boy-cub-person
will do something rash."

"His elders will restrain him, as I would restrain
you. I will do worse if you don't leave me to my
rest."

Muf turned to go, looked back over a shoulder, and
grumbled defiantly, "Don't say I didn't tell you of it,
old one."

Ruumahum shook his head, wondered why it was
that cubs were so questing and inquiring, so disrespect-
ful of an elder's rest. They rose with questions at all
hours and times. The drive to dispel ignorance—a
drive, he reminded himself, he also had been subject
to—the drive was still there, but mellowed by ex-

75

perience. Mellowed also by the quiet assurance that
death explained everything.

He snugged his head back into his crossed paws,
ignored the steadily dripping rain, and was instantly
asleep again.

VII

Born angrily broke off another of the dead
branches from the trunk of a tertiary parasite, careful
despite his rage not to harm any of the healthy, living
shoots.

They were four days linear march out from the
Home, and his anger at the now distant group of
sullen hunters had not abated. But some of the anger
was directed inward at himself for locking himself into
this crazy expedition.

Ruumahum patrolled the hylaea off to Bom's left.
He sensed his person's discomfort and kept his dis-
tance. A person made blind by anger was as unpre-
dictable as any of the forest denizens, and one furious
at himself the most unpredictable of all.

Adding to Bom's discomfort was the total incom-
petence of the giants. They seemed to know nothing
of normal walking or climbing. A child held better
footing than they. Had he not been close at hand, there
would already have been some serious falls. What
would they do if a brown many-legs or a Buna floater
charged them? Ruumahum moved below them when
they came to a more difficult place, but even the fur-
cot's superfast reflexes might not be enough to stay a
fall of several levels. It would take only one such fall
to end the expedition.

He broke, off the last branch, gathered up the wood
in his arms, and started back toward the wide section
of cubble he had chosen for this evening's camp.
76

Today it appeared the giants were doing a little bet-
ter, moving a little less hesitantly through the trees.
Cohoma no longer showed the same tendency to slip
every time he jumped for the next vine, or to over-
extend his grasp for same.

Logan had finally been convinced it was dangerous
to reach for each new bloom and plant they passed.
Bom did not smile as he recalled the incident two
days past, when she had sought a drink from the
gobletlike vermilliot. Only a quick step and a crisp
blow on the forearm had kept her from touching it.
She had glared angrily at him until he had shown her
the minute differences in the vermilliot and the sur-
rounding vermillion plants: the vermilliot had two ex-
tra petals, an unusual thickening of the base, a darker
red color, and telltale spottings near the lip of the
cylinder—all flaws in otherwise perfect mimicry.

Finally he had used the bone knife. Making sure
both giants were well clear, he moved above the
plant. With the point of the blade he had tipped the
green cylinder so that the clear liquid inside spilled
free. The vermilliot's water was clear, but rainwater it
was not. The stream struck the meter-thick liana be-
low, splashed, and sizzled, forming a dense cloud that
rose into the air. When the mist finally faded, he
beckoned them nearer. Cautioning them not to step
on the lingering dampness, he showed them the hole
the clear liquid had made through a meter of wood and
into the depths beyond.

Lastly, he had carefully tapped the green wall of
the false bromeliad. They heard the deep, almost
metallic bong, utterly unlike the soft tap when he
struck one of the true vermillions.

From that point on neither of the giants so much as
brought a finger close to a new growth without first
consulting Bom. That made him only slightly happier,
for innumerable questions slowed them down as effec-
tively as a wound or a broken limb. They moved at
perhaps a third of the speed he would have managed
alone.

With a short jump he dropped down to the'huge
cubble selected for camp. From the first day, deciding
on a camp had proved a problem. It seemed the

77

giants could not tolerate many evenings without shel-
ter from the night-rain. They insisted on protection
despite the time and effort it cost, and Born had
grudgingly complied. Their excuse was that constant
exposure would engender a strange sickness in them,
which they called a cold.

Bom failed to understand. No person could be so
fragile. Indigestion was the only illness he was familiar
with, and that occurred only when he ate food other
than the fruit of the Home tree. But the descriptions
and assurances of sickness the giants, gave him were
so horrid he could hardly deny them their necessary
protection.

'There he is," he heard Logan say to her com-
panion as he approached. He wondered why they
lowered their voices so often, speaking at a less than
normal volume. The thought that they might be trying
to keep something from him never occurred to him.
Anyway, he could hear them clearly enough, even
when they conversed in what was called a whisper.
Who was he to question the peculiarities of those who
could fly through the sky?

They might have spent more time, he mused as he
dumped the load of wood on the main branch, im-
proving and perfecting their own bodies instead of con-
structing new artificial ones to shield them from the
world.

"We were getting a little nervous, Bom," Logan ex-
plained with a broad smile. "You've been gone a long
time."

He shrugged, set about constructing a crude lean-
to from the accumulation of dead branches and ex-
traneous leaves. "It is difficult to find adequate ma-
terials for a dry shelter," he told her. "Most dead-
wood and old leaves fall to Hell to be eaten, like all
else that falls."

"Eaten's the word, I'll bet," Cohoma agreed, peeling
the skin from a large purple spiral. "There should be
bacteria down there big as your freckles, Kimi. The
amount of dead vegetable matter that must fall to
the ground here each day—"

There was a crash of leaves, and he jumped to his
feet. Logan hurried to ready the bone spear she had

78

been provided with. It was only Ruumahum. Bom
smiled as he studied the giants' expressions. Despite
protestations to the contrary, it was clear they would
never quite get used to the big furcot's presence.

"Person and furcot come," the emerald hexapod
declared.

"Stranger or—?" Born stopped as a tall figure
stepped into the light, and his hand moved instinc-
tively for his knife. A second furcot, not quite as
big as Ruumahum, was at the man's side.

Losting.

The big hunter did not smile as he met Bom's
gaze. Logan eyed Bom questioningly. He ignored her.
Nor did he move his hand from the hilt of his knife.
The two furcots exchanged soft growls and moved
on to converse on a nearby limb. Losting took a
couple of steps forward.

"When two lone hunters meet on the trail," the big-
ger man said, taking his gaze from Bom long enough
to study the giants, "it is meet that the one who has
made camp invite the latecomer to share with him."

"How come you here, now?" Bom asked sharply,
ignoring ritual courtesy for the moment. He looked
groundward so Losting could not see the anger in his
eyes. "I saw you last standing with Brightly Go as we
left the Home."

"That is so," Losting admitted without gloating. "I
think now, as I have these past days, that I should
have stayed with her, as she will need someone to
comfort her and make a life with her when you are
dead."

"You did not follow alone for four days to taunt
me," Bom noted tensely. His anger was melting under
the illogic of the situation. "Why then did you follow?"

Now it was Losting's turn to look away. Walking
past the two giants, he squatted and rested chin on
forearm as he examined the shelter being built. "I tried
to forget what you said that night in council. I could
not. Nor could I forget that you alone had gone down
into the well in the world, to discover that the blue
thing was not a demon, but a thing of axe metal. To
discover them." He nodded at a curiously watching
Logan and Cohoma. "I was ashamed I had been

79




afraid, even though the others of our party who had
returned are not. They excused themselves by saying
you were mad. I could not so excuse myself." He
looked back at Born. "Then when you said you would
try to go with these giants to their Home, I too thought
you mad. Born. And when you left, I was happy, for
I had Brightly Go in my arms." Bom tensed, but
Losting put up a restraining hand. "I thought how
good it would be now, with Brightly Go to myself.
How good not to have you around, Bom, always to
come back with another, greater kill. How good not
to have to compete for her with a madman. How
good not to fumble with hard words while you always
said the soft, proper ones."

The last of Bom's anger vanished. An astonishing
thought occurred to him. Could it be that Losting—
massive, muscular Losting, mighty hunter and warrior
Losting—could it be that he was jealous of Bom?

"I stayed while you left," the other hunter continued,
"but I stayed troubled. When Brightly Go left me,
I went to the edge of the Home and sat there, star-
ing into the world where you had disappeared. Think-
ing. Ashamed. For, I thought to myself, what if you
should reach the giant's station-Home as you had
reached then- sky-boat? What if you should come back
with this success on your shoulders? What then would
Brightly Go think of me? And what, what would I
think of myself?" Losting's face was twisted.

"You persecute me, Bom, whether you are near or
not. So I found myself thinking, maybe you are mad,
but mad and skilled, even still you are no braver than
Losting. None is braver than Losting! So I followed.
I will follow to the giants' home or to the death.
You will not have this triumph over me, you will
not!"

"Bom, what's this all about?" Cohoma asked.

Logan shushed him. "Can't you see it's personal,
Jan? Something deep between these two. Let's not

intrude."

"As long as it doesn't affect our return." Cohoma

said.

"What of this, then?" Bom queried, relaxing a little.

80

"Why do you not continue to follow as before? Clearly
it was the better course of plan."

"And would keep me from your eyes," Losting
finished, without anger. "And you from mine. But
we cannot go on."

"You'll not discourage me with—"

"No, not I, Bom." Losting's tone was conciliatory.
"Not having to pause to construct shelters for the
giants, I've traveled a little ahead of you each day,
not behind. I've only just now come from," and he
named a modest figure, "ahead. What I've seen
prompts me to make contact."

"And what have you seen?"

"Akadi."

"I don't believe you."

"Then keep on this path, and be food for busy
mouths. I've seen the column."

Bom considered. Losting would not jest about some-
thing so serious—not even to embarrass Bom before
BrighflyGo.

"What's going on?" Cohoma finally asked impa-
tiently. "What's this talk about not going on? What's
this acoti... whatever?"

"Akadi," Bom corrected heavily. "We must go
back."

"Now look—" Cohoma began, getting to his feet.
Logan restrained him, but this time he shook her off.
"No, I'm going to tell these regressives what I think of
'em. First they make a big show of helping us. Then
they get a little ways away from the home fires, and
they have second thoughts." He turned to Bom. "Or
maybe you're getting close to that five-day limit no-
body's ever exceeded and—" Suddenly aware he was
overdoing his frustration, Cohoma stopped.

"You do not know of the Akadi," Bom murmured
with quiet fury. "Or you would say only, when do we
run."

"Bom," Logan began, "I don't think that's—"
"You talk of delays, and bravery, and intentions.
Do you think I'm risking my life out of the goodness
of my heart? Do you think I'm doing it for either of
you? I care nothing for the both of you, you great,
col4 people!" He calmed slightly and turned his at-

81

tendon to Cohoma. "You are different in size and color
and mind. You come to us in a sky-boat of axe metal.
I went down the well you made in the world not to
save you, but to see what your boat was. To find
out things. To please myself. I go to your station for
the same reason—not to save your lives, but for me,
me! And it is for me that we turn back, for myself
and Losting and our people, not for you. You can
go on and die, or hide and rot before the column
catalogs your scent. It is nothing to me. But we can-
not go on. We may never go on again. We must
return to the Home."

"Bom," Logan said after a long silence, "we are
still ignorant of your ways and much of your world.
You must pardon us. What are the Akadi, and why
do they force us back?"

"We must warn the Home," said Losting. "The
Akadi may pass it. If so, all will be well. If they do
not . . ." He shrugged. "We must try to stop them."

"I believe you, Losting," Bom confessed hesitantly.
"But I would have final proof." He indicated Cohoma
and Logan. "And I think it would speed our return if
the giants were to see the sign of Akadi passing."

Losting nodded agreement and rose. "It is not far,
not as far as I would wish. We can be near and
return before the water falls."

Both hunters started off down the limb. Cohoma
and Logan had to hurry to follow. Logan stumbled and
twisted her way through the clutching thorns and
branches and saw-edged leaves. Ruumahum paced be-
low her as a precaution. The first two days had ac-
customed her to living the death of a thousand cuts
every sunrise to sunset, and she was getting tough-
ened. She marveled at how Bom never seemed to get
cut or scratched despite the thickness of the brambles
he led them through. It was positively uncanny. No
doubt, she reasoned, it was his smaller size, his lithe
build, coupled with the innate knowledge of the
hylaea's construction that enabled him to slip smoothly
between the most closely packed webs of leaves and
stems and twigs.

A bulky green shape appeared next to her. She
didn't jump this time, just quivered a little inside. She
82

was growing used to the furcot's size and silent ap-
proach.

"Ruumahum, what are the Akadi?"

The furcot sniffed. "A thing that eats."

"One thing, or many?"

"There are thousands of them, and there is one of
them," Ruumahum replied.

"How can there be thousands and only one?"

Ruumahum growled irritably. "Ask Akadi." He
plunged off the branch and downward.

Logan followed his path in her mind's eye, repeating
to herself theatrically, "into the foliage below! . . .
foliage below . . . foliage below . . . foliage. Fol—
emfol—Empathetic foliation?" Precise terminology for
an acquired superstition, she mused. That might ex-
plain the term, but not the rationale for the belief's
intensity. She was missing something. It would have
to wait. Losting had been right, they did not have
far to go.

Now they were moving through a densely packed
thicket of aerial greenery striped with bright yellow.
It grew at right angles, forming a living checkerboard.
Losting indicated they would have to pass around it,
a detour of some dozens of meters.

Cohoma put out a hand and grasped the nearest
of the interlocking, finger-thick stems. "Why go
around?" he asked Bom, with a gesture at the lat-
ter's broad-bladed knife. He squeezed the branch.
"This stuff is herbaceous, soft, pulpy. If we're in a
hurry, why not cut our way through?"

"You consider death with such indifference," Bom
told him, eyeing him in much the way Cohoma would
study a bug under a microscope. "Can it be that on
your own world you are a hunter of sorts, too?" There
was a certain unidentifiable stress laid on the word
sorts.

It was Cohoma's turn to stare at Bom. "It's just
some big succulent."

"It is alive," Bom said patiently. "If we cut through
it, it will become not-alive. Why? To save time?"

"Not only that. If there's some kind of multiple
omnivore around here, I'd rather not be caught in

83




tight quarters. The more spase cleared around me,
,the better."

Bom and Losting exchanged glances. The two fur-
cots waited nearby. "He would kill for a few minutes
of better light," Bom observed wonderingly. "Your
priorities are strange, Jancohoma. We will go around."
Cohoma had additional questions, and Logan as well.
However, neither Bom nor Losting would answer them
now.

Eventually they rounded the copse of the checker-
board succulents. In another minute they were walk-
ing in dense jungle. A turn, cut, and suddenly they
entered an unexpected open space, much as Cohoma
had wished for, tunneled out of the forest. The tunnel
was taller than a man, taller than Logan or Cohoma.
It was a good five meters wide, stretching in a
straight line to left and right until it merged into
green.

"Akadi made this. They are mindless and of
one purpose. They eat their way through the world,
leaving—this." He indicated the clear space. Within
that tunnel, life had ceased to exist. It had simply
disappeared into ... what?

"Is the line always so straight?" Logan asked.

"No. The column sends out scouts. If the food lies
thicker in another direction, the Akadi swerve and
eat in a new path. Once started, nothing turns them
but their own hunger. See." He pointed down the tun-
nel. "They will eat through anything, consuming any-
thing living in their path that cannot get out of their
way. I have seen them eat through the heart of a Pil-
lar tree and come out the other side. It is said that
one can stand by the very edge of their, tunnel and,
though one could reach out and pull you in, they will
not deviate from their chosen path. As those in front
are sated, they drop back, letting new members eat
themselves full. By the time the last has eaten, the first
are hungry again. They stop only to rest and breed."

Cohoma looked relieved. "No problem, then, is
there? Don't tell me you're concerned because they
seem to be heading toward your village?" Born
nodded.

The giant spread his hands. "What's the trouble?

84

All you have to do is pack up your kids and furcots
and get out of the way until they've eaten their way
through, then move back in, right?"

Bom shook his head slowly. "No. The pods will
kill some of them, but not very many. You do not
understand. We could do what you say, but it is not
ourselves we fear for. They are on the village level.
They will reach the Home and eat their way through
the trunk itself. Once the bark is pierced they will eat
through to the heartwood. The Home will lie defense-
less to parasites and disease. It will blacken and
die, unless we can stop the column, or turn it."

There was nothing more to be said. They left the
tunnel, Logan and Cohoma trailing.

"But Bom," Logan persisted, "surely the presence
of you two will not make any difference in the defense
of the tree! Two men more. Take us on to our sta-
tion. We have devices there which could halt this cam-
age before it reaches the Home, devices you can't imag-
ine or conceive of."

"That may be so," Born conceded, "but we are
uncountable days from your station-Home. At their
normal rate of march the Akadi will reach the Home
well before we could reach your station. We must warn
the others and help prepare. You will help, too."

"If you think," Cohoma shot back, "that we're go-
ing to hang around while—"

"Of course we'll do what we can, Bom," Logan
said soothingly, after a sharp glance at her partner.
"We'll be honored to help after what you've already
done for us." She put a hand on Cohoma's shoulder
and held him back. They dropped behind Bom.

"What the- hell's the matter with you, Kimi?" whis-
pered Cohoma angrily. "If you'd just let me argue
with them a little more I might have convinced
them that we're of no use to them. They could leave
us on the nearest branch and we'd—"

"You shortsighted idiot! We've no choice but to
cooperate. We might as well. If this defense of the
tree fails, we're as dead as if the Akadi had eaten
us. Or do you think we can make it through this
greenhouse Hades without help? You've seen what
it's like. We'd be dead a dozen times over by now if

85

it weren't for Born. Remember the false bromeliad I
thought was full of water that turned out to be full
of add? We'll fight, sure. H it begins to look as
hopeless as Born makes it sound, why, then we'll
have plenty of time to skip clear." She stepped care-
fully over a magenta and blue fungus. "Until then,
we'd better do our best to see that they survive. Unless
you'd prefer to strike out on your own."

"Okay, I wasn't thinking," Cohoma admitted. "I'll
go along as long as they're able. But I'm not dying
for any damn tree. I'd rather take my chances in the
hylaea."

Bom would have wondered at this strange talk,
but at the moment his mind was filled with thoughts
that drowned out any other sound. The Akadi were
marching toward the Home, marching toward Brightly
Go. He suspected the giants would not fight to the
death, if it came to that. He did not bother to tell
them that once the Akadi had their scent, they would
follow the smell of an enemy until it dropped. Once
the conflict was joined and the Akadi senses height-
ened, all within range of their olfactory sense were
doomed to death, unless the Akadi died first. If they
somehow managed to stop the ravaging column and the
giants discovered this information, they could berate
Bom all they wished.

Brightly Go had hurried back from gleaning the
Home when word of Bom's return reached her. She
saw him talking excitedly with Sand and Joyla and
started toward him, pleased and surprised at his sud-
den, unexpected safe return. Then she noticed that
Losting was with them and talking easily with Bom as
well as with the elders. She slowed, stopped, stared
for a long moment. Then she whirled and began walk-
ing slowly back toward the house of her parents. Now
and then she would glance back over her shoulder,
talk quietly to herself, and shake her head.

"How long?" asked Sand solemnly.

"Two days march for a man," Losting told them,
gesturing back into the forest.

"No chance they will pass to one side or the
other?"

86

Bom shook his head. "I think not."
"They'll cut right through the middle of your vil-
lage." Bom turned as they were joined by the two
giants and Reader. "You're all seeing this cockeyed,"
Cohoma continued. "You're going to sacrifice your-
selves trying to save a tree? Listen, how long would it
take for the tree to die when the Akadi have finished
with it, eaten their way through?"

It was Reader's turn to respond. "By the old cal-
endar, perhaps a hundred years."

Cohoma's face mirrored his feelings. "You could
raise two or maybe three more generations here, be
searching safely in small armed groups for a new tree.
But if you stay and fight these Akadi, you'll all die, it
seems. What's the point of that?"

"The Home will live," explained Joyla with dignity.
"Right," commented Cohoma bitterly. "Throw away
your lives for a damned holy vegetable." He directed
his words to Logan. "They're not human enough to
be repatriated to the Commonwealth any more.
They've regressed too far. The normal survival fac-
tor's been bred and cut out of them by this dunghill."

The chief shook his head sadly while both hunters
simply studied the giants as they would a new variety
of Chollakee.

"Giants who claim to come from another world,
I do not understand you. It may be as you say, we
are more different than we appear."
"And it's going to be left at that?"
Joyla and Sand nodded in unison.
"We don't pretend to understand you completely,"
Logan admitted in a conciliatory tone, while Cohoma
cursed softly. "But some of our ways might be of
some help to you."

"We certainly will consider any suggestions you
would like to make," Sand replied politely.

"Okay," she said enthusiastically, "the way I under-
stand it, the only thing these Akadi will turn for is
to defend themselves against an attacker, right?"
"That is so," Born told her.

"Well then," she continued brightly, "why not hit
this column from the side. Once they turn to defend
themselves, won't they continue on the new pathway?"

87

Sand smiled, shook his head. "The Akadi remem-
ber. They would pursue and kill any creature foolish
enough to assault them, then return to their original
line of march."

"Oh," Logan murmured, crestfallen. "I'd wondered
why nobody suggested a diversionary attack. All it
would gain would be a little time."

"A very little time," Losting added.

"Swell, terrific," a frustrated Cohoma put in. These
people were getting on his nerves. Here they had ac-
tually found someone to guide them back to the sta-
tion and safety, and now this ridiculous bit of logic
demanded they kill themselves off trying to save a
tree for the fourth generation, instead of simply pick-
ing up and moving for a day or so. It went against
reason!

But despite his earlier outburst, Cohoma had no il-
lusions about their chances in the jungle by them-
selves. They would end up in the grip of some cyanide-
spitting cabbage, or something equally bizarre.

He took a deep breath. It was essential, then, that
these Akadi be destroyed. To that end, both he and
Logan were vocal in volunteering their full coopera-
tion. If the fight was won, they would get credit for
great bravery and comradeship. If it were lost, well,
they would take their chances in the forest. Neither
knew of the Akadi's ability to follow the scent of
their enemy down to the last straggler.

The two giants willingly helped raise the ramparts
of sharpened ironwood stakes. These were wedged
and then tied with woven vine into place on the side
of the Home where the Akadi assault was expected to
come. The bristling poisoned stakes and spines would
blunt, not halt, the Akadi surge. The latter would
overwhelm such pedestrian defenses by sheer weight
of numbers, the living using their dead and impaled
cousins as a bridge.

But the inhabitants of the great tree had other de-
fenses, defenses which, despite their considerable ex-
perience in researching the vegetation of this world,
Cohoma and Logan were unfamiliar with.

What, for example, was the purpose of the large
nuts twice the size of a terran coconut that had been
88

gingerly suspended over the cubbies the Akadi would
use to enter the tree? Unlike the mountain of deadly
jacari thorns and tank seed pods which had been
gathered, there was nothing in the nuts to hint at
concealed deviltry.

Cohoma came up with what he thought was an
obvious, yet brilliant, solution. He overlooked some-
thing Logan did not—the fact that while Bern's people
were primitive, they were not stupid.

"Why not," he suggested to a small group of busy
men, "just cut away all the vines and cubbies and
lianas leading into the Home tree? Unless these
Akadi can fly, too, they'll be forced to go around."

By way of reply, Jaipur, an elderly craftsman,
handed Cohoma a finely honed bone axe and directed
him to try it on the nearest big liana, which was
about as big around as a man's thigh. Cohoma pro-
ceeded to do just that, hammering away at the in-
credible substance for a good ten minutes. .The axe
blade was finally dulled to the point where it would
no longer cut. All he had achieved was a notch barely
a couple of centimeters deep in the protective bark.

"You might have guessed, Jan," Logan reminded
him, "that none of the natives would suggest deliber-
ately hurting anything growing unless they knew you
had no chance of success, even with a vine."

Jaipur made an expansive gesture, grinning a
crooked grin out of one side of his face. The other
had been paralyzed by an encounter in childhood
with a certain spiny plant. "There are many thousands
of such pathways, twining and entwining, leading to
the Home from every direction. Many are far thicker
than a furcot's body. There are not enough axes in
the Home, or enough time in the world to cut them
all, could they be so cut."

Before moving to sharpen yet another ironwood
spear Jaipur also showed Cohoma how each cubble
had six others supporting it. Cutting one or two
without cutting its dozen or more supports would be
a waste of time.

"You'd need a tripod rifle to make a start," Logan
observed. "Hell, the undergrowth here is so entangled
89

you'd have to cut down half the forest to make a
decent gap between it and the tree."

Reader passed the group and regaled the two giants
with tales of how the Akadi could cross considerable
open spaces without any support by forming a living
bridge of interlocked bodies. This story of rending al-
ien limbs engendered a desire in both Cohoma and
Logan for a little more instruction in the handling of
available weaponry. Both had been presented with
ironwood spears, plus bone axe and knife. Logan
would have preferred a snuffler, but the bazookalike
blowguns required time and skill to make. There
weren't enough for all who knew how to use them.

They would have been abashed to know that one
reason they had not been offered snufflers was that
Born had convinced the chiefs that in a difficult
spot, they were more likely to prick themselves on
one of the toxic thorns than .kill Akadi.

Requests for a more detailed description of the
enemy resulted in Bom's displaying an unexpected
talent for illustration. Using a white chalklike sub-
stance, he drew on a plate of polished black wood.
"You must try to strike here," he instructed them,
"between the forelegs, or here between the eyes. Each
Akadi," Born continued, "is about half the size of
a man ... myself."

"About the size of a German shepherd," Cohoma
mused.

Bom went on. An Akadi had a thick flexible body
with no tail; it walked on six thin but very powerful
legs, each leg terminating in a single long, curved
claw that enabled the Akadi to scurry slothlike along
any part of a branch or cubble. The front of the
body tapered slightly, ending in double jaws with
no neck, surrounded by muscle. The double jaw ar-
rangement fascinated Logan. One set worked up and
down in the usual fashion, while the opposing ones
moved from left and right. Working in unison they
created a biting phalanx which could cut through the
toughest wood or bone as neatly as a laser could slice
sheet metal.

The teeth set in the upper and lower jaws were
triangular and razor-edged, while those on the side

90

were square, serrated on top, and curved slightly
backward to shove food into the ever-hungry gullet.
Three eyes, spaced across the top of the head, lay
just back of the jaws. There were three tentacles, one
on either side of the head and another below that
were equipped with jagged, tearing suckers on the
tips for holding prey. In color the Akaki were a
distinctive rusty orange, eyes and legs bright black.
Despite the triple oculars their sight was rumored to
be poor.

"This is countered somewhat by their sense of
smell and of touch," Born concluded, "which is very
good indeed."

"An eating maching in multiples," Logan declared
quietly. "Very well designed, very efficient." She shook
her head, murmured, "God on a seat, I wouldn't
care to tangle with one of them. And we have to
fight thousands." She looked evenly at Born. "You
people really think you can stop something like this
armed with a few glorified blowguns and spears?"

"No," said Bom, wiping the polished wood clean
with a forearm. "I have things to do now." He turned
to leave.

"There's no hope for them, no hope at all," a dis-
gusted Cohoma blurted when Born was out of earshot.

"I'm afraid there's not much left for us, either,
Jan."

VIII

They heard the sound while they were resting just
outside the first ring of the Home's pod-laden vines.
Initially it was only a soft rustling in the distance, like
wind moving through far-off branches. It grew stead-
ily louder, became a hum, a buzzing like a billion
bumblebees aswarm at a new nest.

91

It intensified, swelled, and resolved into a deafen-
ing crackling sound neither Cohoma nor Logan would
ever be able to forget. The sound of hundreds of tons
of organic matter vanishing down innumerable throats.

A familiar form bounded up from a liana below. "Be
ready, giants. The Akadi near," Losting advised them.

Logan's grip tightened on the shaft of the ironwood
spear and she checked to make certain bone axe and
knife were still strapped securely to the belt of her
rapidly disintegrating shorts, though she intended
never to get close enough to one of the carnivores
to use either. They would run before that.

Losting moved to go by them. Cohoma gestured at
him to pause. "We haven't seen Bom for a couple
of days now, Losting. I know he's been busy. Is he
manning another part of the line?"

"Born." Losting's face went through several changes
of expression ranging from satisfaction to disgust.
"You've not see Born for some days because he's
been gone for some days." Losting clearly relished the
shock on the faces of the two giants. "He left the
Home one night and has neither been seen nor heard
from since. It is certain he did not go toward the
Akadi. We have had scouts out marking their prog-
ress toward the Home. His furcot has vanished with
him." The implication was clear—the hunter had run.

"Born, a coward?" Logan sounded confused. "That
doesn't make sense, Losting. When the rest of you
were afraid, he was the only one who would come
down to our skimmer."

"Those who are mad act for reasons of their own,
which no man can comprehend," Losting countered.
"Your sky-boat was an unknown quantity, unlike the
Akadi, who are known too well. With them, one
knows exactly what to expect. Death. Born is a hunter
and a solitary person by habit. If the Home dies and
the village dies with it, he could survive alone. There
is no doubt he is the cleverest among us." His expres-
sion darkened. "But he has not been clever in this,
for if there is any village to come back to, he will not
be allowed to live among us. The chiefs and the sha-
man have ordained this already." He spun. Gripping
the vine nearby, he pulled himself up to the branch

92

immediately above to check on the readiness of the
defenders there.

"I still don't believe it," Logan whispered, turning
back to face the forest. "I consider myself a better
judge of human nature than that."

"I told you they'd abandoned their humanity in
making concessions to this world," Cohoma grumbled.

"Oh, come on, Jan! How could they have regressed
so much in so short a time? The earliest colony ships
only go back a few hundred years." She quieted. "I
could swear I had that Born figured."

"There's another possibility, you know, Kimi," Co-
homa ventured after a pause. He eyed her appraisingly.
"Even someone like Losting, who doesn't like him,
admits he's a smart boy. Maybe . . . maybe he's
figuring on us bailing him out."

Logan looked at her companion curiously. "How
do you mean?"

"Well, think a minute," he said, warming to the
subject. "He's out there somewhere"—he gestured
back through the palisade of sharpened stakes toward
the other end of the village—"waiting for us to join
him if the battle goes as badly as everyone expects.
We circle clear as soon as the end is in sight. He
joins us, we make it to the station, he gets that burn-
ing curiosity of his satisfied plus he saves his life."

"That would imply," she countered vociferously,
"that he cares nothing for his Home or his friends.
I don't believe that. I think the tie is as strong, if
not stronger, in Born than in any of these folk. I
could understand such an attitude in some soldier-of-
fortune, the kind of gun for hire you might meet in the

back streets of Drallar or LaLa or Repler, but not
in Bom."

Cohoma grinned. "I think you see a little too much
of the noble savage in our stunted cousins. Our friend
Born is just resourceful enough to make the break,
just iconoclastic enough to—"

The first line of Akadi broke through the dense
wall of green and all conversation died. The column
measured seven or eight Akadi across and extended
into the forest until it disappeared in verdure. They
were packed body to body, so close that the front

93

resembled a single monstrous snake, all woolly orange
fur, clawed legs, weaving tentacles. Filtered green
light shone on orbs like ebony cabochons, dark wells
of unsapient malignance.

Tiny explosive pops sounded as the ring of care-
fully positioned hunters let loose with a dozen tank
seeds at once. The Akadi crumpled, tentacles and
clawed legs digging in blind fury at the pricking
thorns, chewing at themselves. Even before the frantic
Sailings of legs and tentacles ceased, the first row had
been shoved aside and tumbled and bounced off
branches and epiphytes into the depths below.

A metropolis of scavengers was going to form be-
neath this place, Cohoma reflected.

While the first dozen hunters reloaded, the second
group fired and more Akadi died. Then the first
fired, and the second reloaded. Such elementary tac-
tics were only temporarily effective. It was like fight-
ing the sea, wave upon wave, a living red-orange ocean
of suckers and teeth moving forward as though
squeezed from a tube.

As the lesser hunters slowed, the firing of the snuf-
flers grew more erratic, less deadly. Now men and
women armed with long lances of ironwood moved
forward to stab and cut at the furry bodies. Others
holding axes and clubs stood ready around the spear-
men, prepared to fend off any Akadi that tried to
escape the spears on either side, above or below.

The blood of the Akadi, Logan noted with the
eye of a trained observer, was a dark dirty green,
like thick pea soup with streaks of brown in it. The
spears were more effective than she would have
thought. Each time one of them moved, an Akadi
died, clutching briefly with tentacles and claws until
the lance was drawn free.

Logan had to admire the efforts of the tribe, primi-
tive or not. While the hunters high in the branches
used their snufBers to pick off as many of the at-
tackers as possible, the forward rank of the Akadi
army, reduced in strength, ran into the wall of spears,
were punctured and cut, and plunged in a steady rain
of corpses to a green grave.

The spirited defense would have worked but for one
94

overriding factor. There was an endless number of
Akadi. The furry killers perished by the dozens, the
hundreds. But the river of death never stopped, never
slowed or rested, but bored steadily onward.

Eventually there would be a pause while a couple
of the hunters waited for a fresh supply of thorns and
tank seeds to be brought up to them. Now and then
one of the spearmen would grow too tired to strike
any longer and would have to be replaced by a reserve.

Then the Akadi would gain another few centimeters,
would press the line of ironwood back a little further.
Nor were casualties absent among the defending peo-
ple. A man or woman might tire and slip on the
never-too-certain footing of cubble and branch and
would have to be helped back by companions. An-
other few centimeters lost, if not the defender.

Given an endless supply of jacari thorns and tank
seeds, and inhuman reserves of strength, Cohoma
estimated the tribe could continue to fight the Akadi
with minimal losses. But they couldn't prevent the om-
nivores from gaining ground. Once a centimeter of
footing was lost to the invaders, it could not be re-
gained. That living torrent would not be forced back.

But the line held, held with the determination of
churchmen. Those in the front rank who finally
collapsed from exhaustion continued to be replaced.
Yet, there were only so many fighters in the village,
and now the replacements were growing fatigued as
well. Occasionally an Akadi would slip under a falter-
ing spear to grab a leg or arm with steely tentacles.
Then an axeman would have to hurry to cut the
monster away, for once having a grip they would let
go only in death.

Steadily the little knot of humans was forced back-
ward, back toward the tree-vines themselves which
formed the natural and last line of defense for the
Home-tree. Once through the pods, the Akadi would
begin devouring the body of the tree itself. Then it
would be only a matter of minutes before irreparable
damage was done.

Logan knew what would happen. The villagers
would throw everything into a final futile effort to push
the Akadi back. For a moment, heads, and arms would
95

rise above the writhing tentacles. Then all—men,
 women, children—would be engulfed by the unthink-
ing mass, leaving the tree to perish despite their

sacrifice.

The fighting raged continuously. It was not as noisy
as a war between men would have been, but neither
was it silent. Along the line of spearmen, men and
women shouted encouragement to each other, defiance
at their dog-sized tormentors, while the Akadi pressed
blindly forward, chattering like a million castanets.

Slowly, grudgingly, the people gave way to the pres-
sure of the untiring Akadi. The army was three or
four meters from the first winding pod-vine when
shouts traveled up and down the line of defenders.
Logan recognized the voices of the shaman and the
chiefs Sand and Joyla, that of Losting, and several
other hunters. A sudden flurry of thorns from the snuf-
flers held the Akadi for a moment while the line parted
and fell to the sides. But the army did not pursue, so
the living stream moved on, eating as it went. They
began to gnaw at the nourishing bark of the tree,
eager for the living wood beneath, as others rushed
on to the first vines.

Cohoma felt a hand at his arm, saw one of the
hunters pulling at him. The man's tone was urgent.
He followed him into higher branches, Logan with
.them. Even as they ran, she turned to gaze over her
shoulder as a shout rose behind them. She saw the
big nuts dropping, to land and burst among the
slithering line of Akadi. As they burst, a fine powder
gushed forth. It shone iridescent in the light of the
receding sun. The Akadi slowed, stopped, began to
paw among themselves with legs and thrashing ten-
tacles. They tumbled over and over on each other, fell
and rolled on their backs, beating against one an-
other, against the wood of the Home, in a sudden, in-
explicable frenzy.

Cohoma found himself racing down toward the
Akadi with others, stabbing with his spear, only to
withdraw it and stab again. He was amazed at the
ease with which it punctured the surprisingly soft
bodies. Green blood covered his lance. Nearby he
saw Logan stabbing and hacking with her own spear.

96

A violent pain stabbed through his ankle. Looking
down he saw that one of the Akadi had somehow
slipped clear of the re-formed line of spearmen and
had locked three tentacles firmly around his leg. Mul-
tiple teeth were chewing at his lower calf. He tried
to get his spear around, couldn't and found himself
falling as his damaged leg gave way under him. Then
something cut the creature between the second and
third eye, pierced completely through the nightmare
shape.

"Thanks, Kimi. Jesus, get it off me!" She stabbed
again and green ichor squirted all over them, but the
triangular teeth refused to relinquish their grip. Even-
tually she had to use an axe to cut the tentacles clear
and then pry the jaws apart. Bright red circles cov-
ered his calf where the suckers had held. He had a
steadily bleeding square wound in the back of the
ankle. Using Logan as support, he limped clear of
the fight. A small bottle of spray from their one sur-
vival kit stopped the bleeding. Coagulation set in imme-
diately. A simple self-adhesive bandage was slapped
into place.

"Didn't see where the bugger came from," he told
her through clenched teeth. Sweat was standing out on
his forehead and he wiped it off.

Logan studied the wound beneath the transparent
bandage. "You're going to have a square scar. Going
to be fun explaining that."

"I hope I have someone to explain it to . . ."
His words were drowned out by a roar that shook
the Home-tree itself. The band of humans redoubled
their efforts as they were joined by dozens of powerful
green shapes.

A massive paw would rise and descend. Every time
it did so, an Akadi would die, spine or skull crushed.
For once the furcots roused themselves en masse
from their daily sleep. For once their services were
offered without consideration or discussion. The mus-
cular hexapods wreaked havoc along the line of Akadi.
Logan recognized Geeliwan, Losting's furcot, among
them; but there was no sign of Ruumahum.

One enormous furcot rose up from the midst of the
fray with several Akadi hanging from him, their ten-

97

tacles seeking vainly for a vulnerable place in that
thick fur, teeth snapping and biting futilely. A second
furcot appeared alongside the first, began picking the
furious Akadi off his companion's body, methodically
crushing them.

Occasionally a furcot would be submerged by the
stream, only to rise and dip like a breaching whale.
However, thick fur, tough hide, and tremendous
strength could not prevail forever against the untiring
army. Every so often a furcot would disappear in the
orange-red river of death and not rise again.

Then when it happened, it was unmistakable.

"Look!" Cohoma gasped at Logan for support and
pointed. "They're turning back, retreating. They've
been beaten!"

Indeed, the Akadi had ceased moving forward,
were in fact moving backward, back into the tunnel
they had eaten through the world. They took nothing
with them, leaving their dead and dying behind and
trampling the injured and maimed in their retreat.

Now the people of the Home, some too exhausted
to move, watched as their more energetic comrades
moved about with axes and clubs—carefully, lest they
slip on the blood-soaked cubbies and branches—dis-
patching those of the killers too crippled to flee.

The furcots gathered to themselves, idly killing a
still biting Akadi, licking and grooming each other's
wounds. Some hunted through the branches and vines
for those of the brethren who would no longer gather
with them.

The exhilaration was temporary. Logan and Cohoma
watched as the human survivors went among the le-
gion of corpses, carefully searching among the muti-
lated and bleeding for any who still lived. Some were
missing arms and legs, others heads or parts of same,
while still others lay with their insides strewn over
bright green leaves and blossoms, still beautiful in the
last rays of the distant setting sun.

"By the Ordainments, they're a courageous bunch.
It's almost enough to make me regret—"

"Shussh," Logan cautioned him, nodding at the
big hunter walking toward them.

A series of square-edged gashes decorated one side

98

of his chest. Some had been crudely bandaged with
long thin strips of a certain leaf. A snuffler rested
loosely on his right arm and he carried a club in the
other. There was hardly a centimeter of his body
that was not covered with the tiny crimson circlets
left by the probing suckers of the Akadi.

"You beat them ... in spite of everything,"
Logan said, when it appeared the hunter was about
to walk past them.

"Beat them?" Losting turned to stare wildly at them,
and they recoiled at the naked blood-fury in his eyes.

"Beat them—no. Do you think they stopped be-
cause of our efforts?" He hesitated. "We slowed them,
true. It was a good fight. One I'd be proud to tell to
my children. We slowed them enough to win the day
. . . the day only. But stopped them, no. They stopped
themselves."

"Stopped themselves!" Logan blurted in spite of
herself.

"Look about you," Losting advised. "What do you
see?"

Both giants turned their attention back to the battle-
field. "Very little," Logan told him. "It's getting too
,dark."

"Yes, it is getting too dark. For the Akadi as well
as us. They have stopped because the day is at its
end. While the night-rain falls they will sleep, to rise
again tomorrow and come on with as much determina-
tion as they did today. We have only so many jacari
for the snufflers, only so much blood. I do not see
us holding them for another night. But we will try.
We would not have stopped them today but for the fur-
cots—and for this."

He bent and reached down with the tip of the club,
apparently slipping its flatter side under something.
Logan and Cohoma leaned forward. At first they saw
nothing. Then a last bit of daylight reflected off some-
thing tiny and bright as a jewel.

"That little thing?" she wondered, reaching forward
with a thumb. "I can squash it like an ant."

Losting moved the club aside before she did just
that. "I'm not fond of you giants, though you fought
well enough this day. But I would not allow my worst

enemy to touch the seed of the adderut." Rising, he
looked around until he found a severed tentacle of a
dead Akadi. He brought it back and laid it before
them.

"Watch." He tilted the club, shook it gently. The
tiny metallic-hued, multilegged thing slid onto the ten-
tacle. As soon as it made contact it seemed to dis-
appear.

Cohoma stared harder in the fast fading light.
"Where'd it go?"

"Look hard."

Nothing happened. Then Cohoma thought he de-
tected a slight swelling under the skin of the tentacle.
Several minutes passed, during which the swelling be-
came a bulge as big as a pebble, then a toe. Losting
took out his knife and used it to touch the top of
the bulge. The taut skin burst and a tiny purple ball
popped out. It began rolling, rolling, toward the edge
of the branch. He put out the club and stopped it,
rolled it back. Cohoma and Logan could just see a
tiny, many-legged spot near the base of the bloated
globe—the original gemlike creature.

"That is the dust of the adderut," Losting explained.
"When it bursts, it scatters millions of these," and he
indicated the tiny bug. "If they touch wood or plant,
nothing happens. But should they touch flesh, whether
of man or furcot or Akadi, they burrow into it and
. . . eat. Ah, how they eat!" This last was uttered
with enough relish to make Logan slightly ill.

Cohoma was feeling none too well himself. This
revelation was enough to make even an experienced,
detached observer a little queasy.

"See," Losting suggested, nudging the purple ball
with the edge of the club, "how it moves, tries to
run. The flesh under the skin where it burrows is
quickly softened and consumed by the dust-bug. When
one of these scrambles clear of its host and falls to
a soft plant, the legs bury in and become roots. The
pulp contained in this gross obscene body turns green
as it is converted into food. Eventually the sac bursts
and a new adderut plant grows on a new host."

"Fascinating," admitted Logan, who was turning
slightly green herself. She was enough of a scientist
100

to hold on to her last meal. But somehow this bo-
tanical marvel nauseated her in a way the day-long
carnage had not. She could imagine several of them
landing on her own body, digging in, eating. "Are
they mobile little plants," she asked hurriedly, "or in-
sects, or what?"

"Maybe a little of both," Cohoma suggested.
"You've noticed the preponderance of green in animal
life here—the furcots, the blood of the Akadi. I'm
beginning to think, Kimi, that the usual clear-cut di-
viding line between plant and animal may not exist
on this world."

"Even so," she replied, "this is one line of research
I'll be glad to let somebody else pursue when we get
back to the station."

Losting was not sure of the meaning of all their
words. "True, they are dangerous things to fight with.
One must work hard to emfol an adderut. If one
should burst while being cut clear . . ." He didn't
need to finish the thought.

"No wonder the Akadi column halted," Logan ob-
served. "That whole forward section must have been
literally eaten inside out in a couple of minutes." She
looked nervously at the wooden ground they were
standing on. "What happens to the millions of those
things that didn't get anything to eat? Are we going
to find them in bed tonight?"

Losting shook his head. "Their furious speed and
energy is necessary, for those that fail to find sus-
tenance immediately upon release die quickly. All will
be dead before the sun is down. You need not
fear them. Nor," he added regretfully, "need the
Akadi. We have no more adderuts. They grow far
apart and infrequently. Though I wish for a thousand
now, I cannot honestly say this makes me sorry."

Logan stepped on the pulsating monstrosity. It burst,
purple-green dye staining the wood of the branch.

They followed the hunter back into the village.
"What happens tomorrow, then?" Logan asked. "Is
it completely hopeless?"

"There is always hope till the last is dead," Losting
reminded them. That did not seem encouraging to the
giants. "We have our snufflers," he said as he hefted
101

the green wood weapon meaningfully, "and our
spears and axes and our furcots. Then there are still
the pollen-pods of the Home itself. After they are
gone . . ." He shrugged. "I have my hands and my
teeth."

He left them. Logan looked after him while Cohoma
muttered, "That's great . . . commendable. I think
we'll do better taking our chances—poor as they may
be—in the forest. I don't feel quite so indebted to
this noble tree." He looked around at the sheltering
trunklets. "At least we'll die on the way home, not in
defense of some stinking vegetable!"

Exhaustion had a single advantage. Sleep was no
problem for even the most worried of the humans in
the Home.

The last drops were still making their way down
from the upper levels of the canopy as the tired tribe
of humans once more prepared for the Akadi assault.
Once again the hunters took up their positions high
in the branches, snufflers ready, making quiet promises
that each precious jacari would take an Akadi with
it. When the toxic thorns were gone, they would lay
snufflers aside and move down with axes and clubs
to fight alongside their families. And once more the
thin line of spearmen set themselves in defiant silence
across the path along which the Akadi army would
soon crawl—set themselves there knowing that those
who should back them up now lay supine in the vil-
lage, unmoving, asleep.

Cohoma afld Logan took places well up in the curve
of one of the major Home-tree branches. They would
have an excellent view of the coming fight, be a little
less anxious to throw themselves into battle. If Lost-
ing's pessimism was born out, they would work their
way back into the village, gather what was available
in the way of provisions, and circle around the Akadi
column. Then they would strike off southwest by
compass, toward the distant station. Maybe they would
reach it, maybe not, but at least they would have
their chance.

Logan thought she heard a distant, feathery rustling
far back in the undergrowth. The Akadi were rising,

102

shaking off the lethargy of night, getting ready to
ravage and destroy and kill again.

The giants readied themselves, as did the snuffler-
armed hunters. So did the line of spearmen and their
covering axe-wielders. They had no scouts out to
warn of the Akadi's approach. They were not needed.
A few moments of advance warning meant nothing
now. It was known where they would come from. Ev-
ery man, woman, and child hefted a weapon and
stared at the green hole in the forest.

Logan whispered to her partner, her knuckles
around the shaft of the spear turning white. "Re-
member, if the tribe starts going under, we get out
fast."

"What makes you think the vine barrier will open
for us?"

"There'll be some last-ditch fighters going through.
Remember, the vines are the tree's last line of defense.
We can always grab a kid from the line and use him.
Besides," she added coolly, "we've been eating the
fruit from this tree for several days. We might, have
accumulated enough of the appropriate chemicals for
the tree to recognize us, too."

The rustling increased, but it seemed at once louder
and more distant. The noise was chilling. Could the
Akadi experience anything as complex as anger, she
wondered? Where they preparing themselves with
some furious war cries and speeches? What kind of
brains did those orange horrors possess? Did all
thoughts fuse in a single mindless evil, or were they
capable of emotions beyond desire for killing, eating,
and sleep? She had no way of telling.

Long moments came and went, and the volume of
distant castanetlike sounds neither diminished nor in-
creased, was loud enough to drown out all other
forest sounds. Those manning the line of spears before
the green tunnel were showing signs of edginess now.
The hunters in the branches shifted constantly, nerv-
ously into new positions. All the while the sun climbed
higher in the green sky. And still that orifice of hell
declined to reveal its multiple horror.

Then there was a definite, if slight, motion detected
at the far end of the tunnel, and shouts sounded up

103

and down the line of defenders—shouts almost of re-
lief. For it was the steady, nerve-breaking waiting that
eroded the determination and broke the concentration
of the hunters and spearmen and was worse by far
than actual battle. However, there was no mass trem-
bling in the herbaceous fronds fringing the tunnel's
mouth, no swaying of branches under massed weight.
A few leaves rustled lightly as the first shape became
visible. But it was not the Akadi. A human shout
came from the tunnel, rising above the maddening,
distant din. A second shape appeared alongside the
first, thick green fur matted with rain, triple eyes half-
closed in sleep.

The hunters slid their snumers off their shoulders
and stared, their eyes widening in shock as Born and
Ruumahum walked slowly out of the tunnel. Bom's
cautionary cry proved unnecessary. Everyone was too
paralyzed to think of prematurely letting loose with a
thorn. If the Akadi had rushed from the tunnel then,
no one could have raised a hand against them.

Then there was a noisy, mass rush, and Bom was
surrounded by men and women, cursing and question-
ing him at once. Ruumahum loped off unnoticed.
While the humans, including an excited and puzzled
pah" of giants clustered around Bom, the furcot joined
his silent brethren and commenced an explanation in
his steady, grumbling tones.

"What happened . . . We thought you'd run . . .
Where did you go ... What of the Akadi ...
What of... ?" the persons asked Bom.
"Please, could I have a drink?"
A container of water was passed up to him. Ignor-
ing the continuous babble of questions, he put the
wooden cylinder to his lips and drank long and deep.
Then he turned it upside down and let the rest of the

tepid liquid cascade over him.

A deep, commanding voice finally rose above the
noise—that of shaman Reader. "Hunters, to your
posts. Re-form your spear line, people of the Home!

The Akadi-"

Bom shook his head tiredly. "I don't think the
Akadi will bother us again. Not for a long while, any-
way." He smiled softly as a fresh wave of astonish-

104

ment passed over the crowd. "The idea was mine, the
stimulation came from Ruumahum's information." He
gestured over to where the furcots were gathered.
"He'd been out hunting, ranging far to the north. I
don't know why, he isn't sure why, but he brought
back word of what he'd found, and that prompted a
thought in my mind. I thought it might work."

"What might work?" several people asked at once.
"Why didn't you tell-"

"Why didn't you tell someone you were going,
Bora?" came the voice of Brightly Go. She pushed
into the circle of people.

"Would it have mattered? There would have been
loud objections, arguing, demands that I remain to lend
my snuffler to the fighting. I would rather have you
think me a coward and mad, and laugh at me. I'm
used to being laughed at. If my scheme had not
worked, nothing else would have mattered, would it?"

There was some uneasy shuming among the as-
sembled folk. Bom had been respected in the village
as the cleverest of hunters, and simultaneously derided
as the maddest of thinkers. Now it seemed he might
have produced a miracle, so there were some embar-
rassed stares.

"It was not far away, down on the mid-Fifth Level."

"What was?" Joyla boomed, her penetrating voice
not to be ignored.

"A way of stopping the Akadi."

"Miracle or no miracle, this truly is madness,"
Reader thought aloud. "Nothing stops the Akadi—
nothing!" His voice was adamant. "In my youth I
saw a column rip apart a herd of grazers. The furcot
cannot stand before them. It is said even the demons
of the Lower Hell respect a wandering column." There
were murmurs of respect from the crowd.

"What could you find, Bom, on the Fifth Level, or
any level, that could stop the Akadi?"

"Come, and I'll show you," he said, and he
turned and started back down the tunnel. He had
taken but a few steps when he realized no one was
following. For the first time now, the exhaustion and
effort of the past days was forgotten, and his face
spread in a wide grin of satisfaction.




"Are you all afraid?"

Go into the tunnel? The tunnel from which the
children of hell had poured only the evening before?
On the word of a madman? It would take more than
a little courage.

Losting was the first to step forward. He was as
fearful as the rest, but he had no choice—Brightly
Go stood there, watching. Then the crippled Jhelum
followed, limping on his injured leg. Almost to the
step. Reader and Sand and Joyla joined him. The
little knot of humanity moved down the winding
tunnel.

They walked down the green tube, its floor and
walls and ceiling formed as if by a colossal drill. As
they did so the noise of angry Akadi grew louder,
loud to the point where one had to lean close to his
neighbor and shout to be heard. There was a sharp
bend in the tunnel, an unexpected bend unlike the
usual paths of the Akadi. Born stopped and gave
directions. A few chops with axes broke through the
roof of saliva-cemented growth, and they emerged
into the open forest again. Bpm beckoned them first
upward, and then on again. Finally he went on ahead,
alone, then returned with an admonition to the others
to be silent and to follow.

After carefully and silently crawling among a thick
twisted limb, they were staring down at an eldritch
carnival, an orgiastic celebration of death unrivaled
except in legend.

A second roofed-over tunnel, its faintly translucent
ceiling snaking back many meters into distant forest,
intersected the tunnel they had just come through.
Where the two tunnels joined, Akadi precision and
order had become chaos.

The Akadi column from the north and lower level
was composed of slightly smaller, redder horrors. They
had dark stripes encircling their abdomen. Where they
met the first column the tunnels were shattered, spill-
ing the combat into surrounding foliage. The battle
raged over a great circle dozens of meters in diam-
eter. Within that circle, nothing existed save stripped
wood and dead, dying, fighting Akadi. Green blood
drenched everything.

106

"Ruumahum found the column," Born told them
softly. "And I had the thought. What could stop the
Akadi, but the Akadi? We attacked before morning
when they were sluggish and slow. We stayed within
strong scent range and they followed. Now they will
continue to fight till only a few of each column are
left. These few will be too weak and disorganized to
offer any threat to the Home. We can easily kill any
who attack, and we have finished with not one, but
two threats."

"But how did you get them here so fast?" Reader
wondered.

"I was afraid I would not have enough powder,
but Ruumahum continued to fetch more and more dry
wood to keep the torches going. I stayed close enough
to the lead Akadi to keep them awake. They fol-
lowed and the others blindly followed them even in
the dark. I have neither slept nor rested for two days
and nights. I think," he finished, sitting down on the
branch, "I had better rest now."

Joyla and Reader grabbed him as his completely
drained body fell from the branch.

IX

Bom opened his eyes, saw a monster Akadi staring
down at him. He sat up like a bursting pod and
blinked, rubbing at his eyes.

"About time you came around," Logan commented,
stepping back from his mat. "You don't even recover
slowly, do you?"

Bom looked around. He was in one of the rooms in
the chief's multi-chambered quarters. "You've been
out," she added, "for about eighteen hours."

"Hours?" He eyed her questioningly, his mind still
fuzzy with sleep.

107

"A day and a half, and I don't wonder, with what
they tell me you went through."

Born had only one thought. "Have I missed the
Longago—the burying time?"

Logan looked confused, stared back to where Co-
homa was sitting and sharpening a knife. "You know
anything about a burying time, Jan?" Her companion
shook his head.

Bom sat up and grabbed her by the shoulder of
her blouse and nearly fell. The tough material didn't
tear, supported him.

"No, Born," a strong voice replied. "You have
preserved too many lives for us to proceed with the
Longago without you. Now that you are returned to
us, it can be done tonight."

"What's this Longago—some kind of ceremony?"
Logan asked, glancing behind her toward Joyla, who
stood in the portal.

"It is a returning. Those who were killed by the
Akadi must be given back to the world." She looked
over at Born. "There are many who must be returned.
It has taken this long to find enough of They-Who-
Keep to take so many. The boy Din is among them."
Seeing the sudden change of expression that passed
cloudlike over his visage, she suddenly became solici-
tous. "How do you feel now? You have slept long,
and sometimes—" '

"All right . . . I'm all right," Bom mumbled, letting
go his grip on Logan. He tried to stand, staggered
slightly, then sat down hard on the woven mat and
held his head in both hands. This did not keep it from
spinning, but it helped.

"I'm hungry," he said abruptly. Since his head was
proving uncooperative, he would concentrate on less
intractable portions of his anatomy.

"There's food," Joyla said simply, beckoning him
into the next room. "Do you need help to—"

"For half a Home fruit I would crawl on my belly,
dragged by my nails," he answered. Moving slowly,
he rose from the bed. Logan got out of his way. Still
weaving, he walked unaided into the room from
which a host of smells issued. Joyla held him steady
on the other side.

108

T

"Mind you do not overload your roots with too
much nourishment too soon," she advised him, and
then she grinned. "Or I will have this room to clean
yet again. And you will have to start afresh."

Bom nodded without really hearing her. He stum-
bled into the room, where fruit, fresh meat, and pre-
served pulp was laid out in abundance on the eating
mat. Joyla beckoned to Cohoma and Logan, indicating
they might as well eat too.

"Thanks," Logan replied.

"You can watch him as he eats and restrain him."

"Why don't you?" Logan asked, as she sat down at
the edge of the mat and selected a bright yellow gourd-
shaped fruit with blue striping.

Joyla shook her head, studied Bom, who was shov-
ing food into his mouth at an appalling rate. "I
have already eaten, and there is much to be done
now that the Longago can proceed." Her'smile be-
came sad. "Tonight I will return many old friends to
the forest, and a daughter as well." She started to say
something else, reconsidered, and left through the leaf-
leather curtain behind her.

Logan continued thinking on this Longago that now
seemed of paramount importance to these people. She
bit into the gourd, found it had a taste like sugared
persimmon. How did Bom's people dispose of their
dead, anyway, with no earth to bury them in? Crema-
tion, maybe, in the firepit at the village's center.

She said as much to Bom. He mouthed contradic-
tions through mouthfuls of food. "The earth? Would
you offer up the souls of your own friends to hell?
They will be returned to the world."

"Yes, Joyla mentioned that," she replied impa-
tiently, "but what exactly does that mean?"

But Bom had returned to his food. She continued
to prod him, arguing that the rest between eating
would do him good. Bom still showed no inclination
to talk, but the giant's constant pestering compelled
him to satisfy her. "It is plain," he finally mum-
bled, "that you know nothing of what happens to
people after they die. I cannot describe the Longago
to you. You will see it tonight."

109

Born had demonstrated a remarkable ability to re-
cover from a totally debilitating experience, Cohoma
mused. He avoided a hump in the funtangcle, hard to
see by torchlight.

The tribe was leading them through one turn after
another in the black forest. Well, this was the kind of
strength you could expect from people who lived in as
harsh an environment as Bom's did. Only, such re-
gression seemed impossible. He told Logan as much.

"These people," he said, with a nod at the marching
column ahead and behind, "aren't that primitive.
They're the descendants of some long-lost colony ship.
Physically, except for those prehensile toes, they're as
advanced as we are, but I don't see how their propor-
tions could change so much in a few centuries." He
stepped over a tiny dark flower growing in the tun-
tangcle. It held an explosive, poisonous spine. "In less
than, oh, at the maximum, ten generations, they've
lost a sixth of their size, developed those toes, under-
gone tremendous expansion of the latissimus dorsi and
the pectoral muscles, acquired uniform coloration of
skin, eyes, and hair. Evolution just doesn't work that

fast!"

Logan merely smiled softly, gestured ahead. "That's
fine, Jan. I agree. So, how do we explain this?"

"I refuse to believe it's parallel development. The
differences are too minor."

"How about rapid mutation," Logan finally hypoth-
esized, "induced by consumption of local chemicals
in their foodstuffs?" She eyed an exquisite grouping of
globular chartreuse fruit surrounded by lavender
blooms.

"Possible," Cohoma finally conceded. "But the scale,

and the speed—"

"Yes, that," Logan interrupted, "coupled with the
need to adapt rapidly or die, could force some ex-
traordinary physiological accommodations. The body
is capable of some remarkable changes when survival
is at stake. Though I admit this would be the most radi-
cal case ever discovered. Still"—she waved a hand lei-
surely at the forest—"if you'd seen some of the reports
coming out of Tsing-ahn's or Celebes' labs . . ." She
shook her head wonderingly.
110

"This planet is a googaplex of new forms, unusual
molecular combinations, combination proteins. There
are structures of local nucleic acids that defy con-
ventional classification. And we've only scratched the
surface of this forest, barely probed at the upper levels.
We've no idea what the surface itself is like. But as
we dig deeper, I'm sure we'll find—"

Cohoma silenced her. "I think something's going to
happen."

They were approaching a brown wall, a monolithic
trunk so vast as to belie its organic origin. Surely
nothing so enormous could grow—it had to have been
built.

The party was beginning to fan out along one of the
big emergent's major branches, torches flashing umber
off the meters-thick bark.

"The trunk must be thirty meters thick at this point,"
Logan whispered, impressed. "Wonder what it's like
at the base." She raised her voice. "Bom!"

The hunter turned from his place in the line of march
and waited politely for them to catch up.

"What do you call this one?" She indicated the
grandfather growth whose central bole was now be-
hind them.

"It's true name is lost to the ages, Kimilogan. We
call them They-Who-Keep, because they hold safe the
souls of the people who die."

"Now I see," she declared. "I was wondering how
you disposed of your dead, since you never descend
to the surface, to the First Level. And I didn't think
you'd hold to cremation."

Born looked confused. "Cremation?"

"Burning the bodies."

Any of Bom's older associates. Reader, for example,
or Sand, would have been openly shocked at this
thought. But Bom's mind did not work like those of
his friends. He merely regarded the question thought-
fully. "I had not imagined such a possibility. Is that
how you dispose of those among you who change?"

"If by change, you mean die," Cohoma responded,
"yes, it is, sometimes."

"How strange," Bom murmured, more to himself
than to the giants. "We come of the world and believe

we should return to it. I guess there are those among
you who are not of the world and therefore have noth-
ing to return to."

"Couldn't have put it better myself, Bom," Cohoma
admitted.

They walked on in silence several minutes more,
until the column began to spread out onto a slightly
wider section of branch.

"We've come to the place?" Logan asked softly.

"One of the places," Bom corrected. "Each has his
place. A proper one must be found for every man." He
looked upward, considered the black branches in the
sky. "Come. You will see better from above."

After several moments of ascending the ever-present
stairway of vines and lianas, they found themselves
looking down on the wide section of branch below.
Everyone was bunched tightly around a deep crack in
the branch. It was several meters across and not many
more long. The feeble light from the torches shielded
against the ram made it impossible to tell how deep it
went into the wood.

The shaman was murmuring words too fast and soft
for either Logan or Cohoma to interpret. The assem-
bled people listened in respectful silence. One of the
men who had died fighting the Akadi and a dead fur-
cot were brought forward from the heavily laden lit-
ters.

"They're buried together, then," Logan whispered.

Bom studied her sadly, a great pity welling up in
him. Poor giants! Sky-boats and other miraculous ma-
chines they might possess, but they were without the
comfort of a furcot. Every man, every woman had a
furcot who joined them soon after birth and went with
them through life unto death. He could not imagine
living without Ruumahum.

"What happens to those furcots whose masters die
before they do?" Cohoma asked.

Bom looked at him quizzically. "Ruumahum could
not live without me, nor I without him," he explained
to the attentive giants. "When half of one dies, the other
half cannot long survive."

"I never heard of such a severe case of emotional

112

interdependence between man and animal," Logan
muttered. "If we hadn't observed any sign of it, I'd
probably suspect some kind of physical symbosis had
developed here as well."

Their attention was diverted from this new dis-
covery by the actions below. Sand and Reader were
now pouring various smelly liquids over the two bodies,
which had been lowered into the Split in the branch.

"Some kind of sacred oil, or something," Cohoma
ventured. But Logan hardly heard him. Emfol. . . mu-
tual burial . . . half of oneself . . . Thoughts were
spinning around and around in her head without
forming any pattern, refusing to mesh, to reveal . . .
what?

The furcots pining away for their dead masters she
could understand. But for a man to die of loneliness
for his animal, probably Cohoma was right. Bom's
people had been forced backward along the path of
development by the sheer necessity to concentrate on
surviving. This emotional entwining was a symptom of
that sickness. One of the pounding thoughts swamp-
ing her brain suddenly demanded clarification.

"You said men and women," she whispered, staring
downward. "Do furcots and people match up by sex?"
Bom looked puzzled. "You know, female furcots to
women, male to male? Is Ruumahum a male?"

"I do not know," Bom replied absently, involved
in the ceremony playing to its conclusion below. "I
never asked." As far as he was concerned, that
was the end of the question. But it only stimulated
Logan's curiosity further.

"And Losting's furcot, Geeliwan. Is it a she?"

"I do not know. Sometimes we say 'he,' sometimes
'she.' It matters not to a furcot. A furcot is of the
brethren of furcots. That is sufficient for them and for
us."

"Bom, how do you tell whether a furcot is male or
female?"

"Who knows, who cares?" This woman's persistence
was irritating him.

"Has anyone ever seen furcots mating?"

"I have not. I cannot vouch for what others may
have seen. I have never heard it discussed, nor have

113

I desire to discuss it. It is not meet, or seemly, some-
how."

The thought suddenly went out of focus again. It
was something to be pursued later. Her attention was
directed downward once again. "What are they doing
now. Born?" Leaves, humus, dead twigs, and succulents
were heaped on the bodies, filling the crevice.

"The Keep must be sealed, of course, against

predators."

. "Naturally," Cohoma agreed approvingly. "The
oils and mulch speed biological degradation as well as
masking the odor of decomposition."

They studied the burial procedure while a steady
chant rose from the assembly, oddly soaring and unlike
a dirge. Reader made several passes with his hands
over the tightly packed, filled crack, bowed once, then
turned and walked toward the trunk, heading for an-
other, slightly higher, branch. The rest of the tribe
followed. They had many, many such interments to
perform this night.

The subsequent burials grew repetitious, and the
drenched Cohoma and Logan used the opportunity to
study the design of seemingly crude torches, which
burned steadily despite the unceasing rain.

Torches of slow-burning deadwood were cut and
then treated with the ever-present incendiary pollen.
The globular leaf of a certain plant was then punctured
through, and the pulp inside cleaned out with a knife.
This left a stiff-sided sphere about thirty centimeters
in diameter. The sphere was then slid over the top
of the torch and a small hole cut in the side. Contact
with a finger through this hole served to ignite the
powder and then the wood, while providing an exit
for smoke and soot, although the wood appeared to
bum almost smokeless. The tough fiber of the leaf
was highly resistant to heat and flame.

The procession wound through the damp darkness
like a chanting, glowing snake spotted with flickering
dots of yellow-green iridescence. Everyone who could
walk, from small children to some older than Sand,
joined in that twisting, spiraling column. None com-
plained, none argued when the column turned upward,
none wished for a rest or return.

Something came out of the forest piercing the normal
night-chitters and the lullaby of falling rain. Born came
back to them. "Stay here with the column. Whatever
happens, do not leave the light."

"Why not, what's—?" Logan began, but Bom was
already gone. The chlorophyllous sea swallowed him
and the six-legged bulk that shadowed him.

They waited with the others in the rain. Then a great
crashing and moaning sounded above the column and
to the right, echoed by the sound of many voices.
The moan rose in pitch, became a screeching, deep-
throated laugh. It rose and fell in a succession of
thunderous whoops.

It ended with a gurgling, choking sound. Something
massive and distant fell to their right with the sound
of shattering branches and torn vines. The light from
the torches penetrated the forest only faintly.

Though given only the briefest glimpse of what-
ever had stumbled on the column in the dark, neither
explorer had any desire for a closer look at that mon-
strous outline.

The crashing faded, dimmed, as the gigantic bulk
vanished into the dark depths like a pebble down a
dry well. There was no definite final crash. The break-
ing and tearing merely faded to a whisper, then a
memory of a whisper, until the rain replaced it. Born
returned to their side as the column started forward
and up once more.

"What was it?" Cohoma asked softly. "We had only
the faintest sight as it fell past." He was startled to
notice that his hands were shaking. "Another species
new to us." It made him feel better to see that not
all of the moisture on Logan's brow had fallen from
the sky.

"One of the big night-eaters," Bom informed him,
his eyes never straying from the coal-black walls on
all sides of them. "A diverdaunt. They will not come
near the Home because of the pods, but a man or
two who meet one in the forest will not come Home.
It was crossing our line, and hungry. Otherwise it
would never have attacked. They are very powerful,
but slow—no match for a band of hunters and furcots

this large." This last was uttered with an unmistak-
able hint of satisfaction.

"Couldn't we have waited till it went past?" Logan

wondered.

Born was shocked. "This is a burial march. Noth-
ing can be allowed to interrupt a burial march."

"Not even a nest of Akadi?" Cohoma murmured.
Born looked at him sharply, eyes flashing in the

torchlight. "Why say that?"

"I'm evaluating your parameters," the research scout

explained, knowing full well Born would have no
idea what that meant, and reminding him that there
were things not even a great hunter could understand.

Logan cursed silently at her partner's lack of tact,
hurriedly asked, "I was just wondering how all these
creatures came by their names, if they were origi-
nally classified by your ancestors?"

Born smiled, back on familiar ground. "When one
is young, one asks. An adult points and says, that is
a diverdaunt, or that an ohkeefer, or that the fruit of
the malpase flower which is not good to eat."

"According to the reports of the first colonists
trapped here," Cohoma muttered to Logan, "who were
in no mood to engage in standard scientific classifica-
tion. So the names that stuck were colloquial rather

than generic."

Born heard this clearly; he heard everything when

the giants engaged in their odd, secretive soft-speak.
But as usual, he gave no indication that he had
heard. It would have been impolite. Though there were
many times when he wished he could understand

more of what he heard.
The column continued onward. Once a series of

spits and squeals sounded from directly above. An-
other time something that thrummed like an unmuffled
navigational computer approached from below and to
their left. Hunters were sent to ferret out the sources
of these threatening sounds, but found nothing. The

people were not attacked again.

Eventually the last who had fallen to the Akadi
were returned to the world. The final words were
chanted, the penultimate song sung.

They returned to the Home. By what method or

116

signs Bom's folk found their way through the forest
neither Logan or Cohoma could determine. And they
were more relieved than they cared to admit when
the first flowering vines with their multitude of pink
blooms and leathery spore sacs came into view.

It was only later, when the entire troop had re-
entered the comforting trunklets of the Home, when
the last slow-burning torches had been extinguished,
when the last leafleather curtain had been drawn
tight, only then did muffled sobs and the lonely sounds
of weeping become audible, held in check throughout
the Longago. Night closed around the village, a moist
black blanket, and brought the mindlessness and com-
fort of sleep.

So there were none to see the movement at the
fringe of the trees, none to see the long shapes stir
from apparent sleep to gather by the topmost curve
of webbed branches.

A lazy cuff to the side of the head brought a
sleeping cub awake and squalling. Triple pupils blinked
in the near-absolute darkness. Ruumahum stood before
Suv. On Muf's passing, this new cub had been as-
signed to his care. There was no twinge of regret, no
lingering sadness at the death of the other. He was
with his person, and that was the Law.

"Old one, what have I done?" Suv pleaded.

"Nothing, as you will doubtless continue to do."
Ruumahum snorted and started to pad up toward
the gathering place. The cub started to follow, stum-
bled over his middle legs, then got all six working to-
gether and shuffled along behind.

"Then what is it?"

"You will see. Be quiet for now, and leam."

Suv detected an unusual solemnity in his new old
one's voice and decided that this truly was a time
for cubs to keep tongue close to palate until otherwise
instructed. Already he was used to this new elder,
though not knowing the Law as well, he still felt an
ache for Toocibel, who had died in the great fight.

When Ruumahum and Suv arrived, all were gath-
ered. In a column of twos they filed out from the
Home, moving through the hylaea with a stealth and
silence that belied their bulk. Sensitive nocturnal

117




carnivores on the hunt detected the mass movement
and slinked near, till they smelled or saw what was
pacing purposefully through the treepaths. Then they
froze motionless, or crept away, or tried to become
one with the forestscape until the column had passed.

Other meat-eaters in their lairs stirred at the noise
of many feet moving and prepared to defend their
territories and dens against whatever dared approach.
A chance gust of nightwind rustled leaves and petals
and brought the scent of furcot to flaring nostrils.
Whatever their size or number or species, no matter
how terrible, those who caught that pungent scent gave
up their territories, their dens, and took themselves
elsewhere. Occasionally a living cloud of luminescent
flitters, all growing crimson and green and azure,
would float down between the branches and cubbies to
hover curiously over the column.

The furcots looked neither left nor right, nor up at
the dancing motes performing their chromatic chore-
ography. Now and then a flitter would dip close, bril-
liant wings flashing gemlike in the night. Colors would
dance in triple cat-eyes.

A certain tree was reached, monarchical in size,
a veritable goliath among local growths. But it was
not its bulk which made it significant to the furcots,
who arranged themselves according to age around a
broad series of interlocking lianas.

Leehadoon, who was furcot to the person Sand,
took the place in the center of the semicircle. He
paused to meet eyes with each of the assembled
brethren in turn. Then he threw back his head. From
between machete-sharp canines and upthrust tusks
came an unearthly sound that was part cry, part
mewling, and part something undefinable in human
terms. The rest of the group joined in without in-
struction—just as Suv and the other cubs were able
to participate without knowing how or why, or the
meaning of what they howled in the dark.

Most animals within range of that nerve-tingling
caterwaul fled. But some crept near, curiosity over-
powering fear, to stare and wonder animal thoughts
at the rite that was at once old and new. It was dif-
ferent this time, more complex than Ruumahum or

118

Leehadoon or any could remember. It would be differ-
ent the next time and the next, the chorus always
building, growing toward some inexplicable, unimag-
inable end.

It was two days before sufficient supplies could be
readied for the second attempt to reach the giants'
station-Home. Two days to prepare for a death the
Akadi had not achieved, most of Bern's fellows be-
lieved.

He had proved himself thrice now in a span of
time no longer than a child's dream. This did not
alter the belief among his fellows of his madness.
They thought, as Losting did, that there is a peculiar
bravery that is part of insanity. Therefore they exhib-
ited respect toward Born now—but not admiration.
There is no recompense in admiring madness.

Born felt only their indifference, without sensing
the attitude that provoked it, since none would admit
their belief in his madness to his face. This made
him madder, but in a different sense. So he sharpened
axe and loiife till it seemed there would be little
left of either, and he thought private angry thoughts.

He had come back from the fight with the
grazer. He had come back from the giants' sky-boat
demon. He had come back from the Akadi. And he
would come back from the giants' station and bring
all the wonders they promised him! Maybe, maybe
then, at last. Brightly Go would see daring and courage
and intelligence whereas everyone else saw only mad-
ness; see that they were worth much more than bulk
and strength.

Of all the hunters, only Losting, for his own pe-
culiar reasons, would come with him still. Had Born
not saved the lives of the others? True, they admitted,
but all the more reason not to carelessly throw them
away. Losting, then, whom Bom could go without see-
ing for the necessary weeks or months of travel and
be blissfully content, would accompany him. He was
secretly glad of the aid the big hunter would provide,
but publicly taunting.

"You think I go to my death. Then why come with
me?" he sneered, knowing the reason full well.

119

"Some say the forest protects the mad. If so, it
surely will save you. And I am as mad as you, for
is not love a kind of madness?"

"If so, then we are surely both mad," Born agreed,
tightening the clasp on his cloak. "And they have been
right all along, and I am the maddest of the lot."

"Remember, Born, you'll not convince me to stay.
I'll see you die or come back with you." He turned
his attention to the two waiting giants, who were talk-
ing with the chief.

Both had consented to accept a present of water-
repellent cloaks, though they still insisted unreasonably
on wearing their own tattered clothing underneath.
When Born argued the absurdity of retaining such
fragments, they countered with their old argument of
catching cold. That stopped Born, for who was to say
what strange maladies might exist among the giants?

"They have learned much in the days they have
lived among us," he observed, "though each is still
as clumsy as a child. At least now they ask before
touching, look before stepping."

"What do you think of them, Born?" Losting asked.

"We must watch constantly to see that they do not
kill themselves before we reach their station-Home."

"Not that," Losting corrected. "I meant, do you
like them as persons?"

Bom shrugged. "They are very different. If all they
claim is true, they can do us good. If not"—he made
a noncommittal face—"it will be a tale to tell our
grandchildren."

That simultaneously brought the picture of a certain
young female to both minds.The conversation ended by
mutual agreement. It would not do to begin a journey
longer than any had ever made with fighting. There
would be fighting enough in the world before they
reached their goal. On that one thing, both were
agreed.

Many in the village had come to see them off with
good wishes and gifts of food, though none would
meet Bom's eyes. They had long since returned to
—the daily business of gathering food and caring for
the Home.

So they took their leave of the Home, the chief

120

and one lone child watching them go. A fat ball of
fur rocked near the child, the cub Suv. The sight
reminded Bom of another child, another cub, now
returned to the world.
He turned his gaze outward.

The sky-boat had been equipped with a good Mark
V ranger, new beacon tracker, tridee broadcast unit,
and automatic beam-homing device. Now all this
equipment was so much scrap, broken and twisted by
gravity and by the sky-demon.

Logan took out the tiny black disk with the clear
face and once more blessed whoever among their out-
fitters had seen fit to include the compass in their
tiny boot survival packs. She hoped this planet pos-
sessed nothing in the way of magnetic abnormalities.
At least, they had not been told of any. But then,
skimmers were supposed to be foolproof, too.

Different variations on the same thought had oc-
curred to Bom. In that respect this journey was sui-
cidal, for they had only the giants' word on where
they were going. The possibility that they did not have
a good idea of where their station lay was something
he preferred not to think on. It did his spirits no good.
Besides, he reasoned, if they did not have a fairly
accurate idea, surely they would not have forsaken
the safety and comfort of the Home on the wild chance
that they would stumble across the station by search-
ing at random. As to what might await Losting and
himself on their arrival at the mysterious station, he
did not know. Handling himself among new people
was not a major concern at the moment.

Many days had passed since they had left the
Home. Though it now lay many rests behind them,
the emotion uppermost in Bom's mind was neither
homesickness nor apprehension of what might lie a-
head. Rather, he felt a peculiar combination of tedium
and tension—tedium arising from the day-to-day dis-
covery that each new section of the world was iden-
tical to that which lay within throwing distance of the
Home and tension from the inescapable feeling that to-
morrow it might not be.

After the first seven-day the giants kept to them-
121

selves as much as possible, save for an occasional ques-
tion whenever they encountered a plant or forest
dweller new to them. That left Born with no one to
talk to but Losting. Not surprisingly, the expedition
proceeded with a dearth of jovial patter.

The hunters continued to regard each other with a
mixture of hatred and respect. These cancelled each
other out and kept the party operating on an even
emotional keel. Both men knew that this was neither
the time nor the place for a violent settlement of
their differences. Mutual slaughter would have to wait

until their glorious return.

As Born had predicted, the specially designed jungle-
resistant fabric of the giants' clothing began to rot
away under the steady assault of a forest which had
failed to read the manufacturer's label. Cohoma and
Logan were more grateful each day for the green
cloaks they had been given. A good cloak offered
its wearer concealment from enemies, and protection
from the night-rain, served as bedding, and had a

dozen and one other uses.

The giants grew more assured, more confident of
their surroundings, as each new day came and went
without incident. Considering their still incredible
awkwardness in negotiating the treepaths. Born felt
the little knot of humans had been exceptionally for-
tunate so far. The only serious encounter they had had
could hardly have been predicted. It nearly cost them

Logan.

"I'll be damned," she had remarked to her compan-
ion, pointing up and to their right. "Is that a patch of
clear sky over there, or am I hallucinating?" Bom and
Losting were moving just ahead of them, and neither
hunter was paying much attention to the giants' con-
versation.

Cohoma looked in the indicated direction. He saw

what certainly looked like an oval section of blue
sky streaked with fluffy white clouds. "Not unless we're
both seeing things. Must be another hole in the forest,
like the one our boat made coming down." They an-
gled toward it.

At that moment Losting turned to make sure their
charges were safe behind them. "Stop—this way!"
122

Bom was slightly ahead of Losting. At the other's
shout, he turned and immediately saw the cause of
the hunter's concern.

"It's all right," Logan answered confidently. "I know
about the sky-demons from first-hand experience."
She shook her head, smiled. "We're too far down in
the forest, and this hole's too narrow to let even the
smallest flier descend. We're safe." She took another
couple of steps along the broad cubble toward the
ellipse of clear blue.

Losting yelled again and hurriedly tried to explain,
even as both giants continued walking. Knowing the
ineffectiveness of trying to argue with Cohoma and
Logan, Bom was already running toward them. As
he jumped from branch to cubble, his snuffler clatter-
ing and banging against his back, he was fighting to
untangle his axe from its belt loop. The two blind
giants were almost to it now. He could see the slight
rippling around the edges of the blue. The axe would
be too late.

Fortunately, others had also detected the danger.
Ruumahum and Geeliwan were there. Powerful jaws
closed gently but firmly on tough cloak material. An-
other function of the multipurpose cape was abruptly
demonstrated as the two furcots yanked backward in
unison. Logan yelped. Cohoma's exclamation was more
detailed.

Bom had the axe out and ready just in case, as
the two giants were dragged clear of the blue patch.
The fluttering around the fringe of that broad blue
circle matched the stuttering of his heart. Both quieted
simultaneously. Thank the Home! An axe would not
have been much good against a clouder, and he would
have hated to depend on Losting's speed with a snuf-
fler. Either way, the clouder would certainly have
killed one if not both of the giants before the jacari
poison could take effect.

Losting came up alongside him. The big hunter had
his own axe out. Together they examined the oval
section of sky and clouds, ignoring the two giants
who were now struggling angrily to their feet. Ruuma-
hum and Geeliwan had let loose their cloaks, but

rested close by, watching. Born nodded to Ruuma-
hum, once. The old furcot snorted and disappeared

with Geeliwan into the brush.

The hunter studied Logan as she fought to remove
her tangled cloak from between her legs. Her face

was flushed. "•

"What's the harm in letting us have a look at the

sky again, Bom? Still afraid of sky-demons? Maybe it
doesn't mean much to you, but we've had nothing over
our heads but green for two weeks now. Just a glimpse
of normal sky—even if it's a bit green-tinged—is a
visual treat for us. To panic like this just because—"

"I would risk leaving you a look at your Upper
Hell were we high enough for it," Bom replied calmly.

"Well, this'll do since we're not. What's wrong with
it? It's just another well in your world, a natural one,
unlike the one we made when our skimmer fell."

Born shook his head. One must force oneself to be
patient with these giants, he reminded himself. They
could not emfol. "You see no sky and no clouds. That
which you see is a clouder resting in killing mode. It
was about to make a meal of both of you."

If the situation had not been so deadly serious, Bom
might have found Logan's expression amusing. She
turned a confused gaze on the circle of "sky," ex-
amined the clouds drifting within it. She eyed Cohoma,
who shrugged and looked blank. "Bom, I don't under-
stand. Is there some kind of animal that sits around
such openings and waits for something to enter the
open space? I don't see anything like that."

"There is no open space," Bom elaborated carefully.

"Watch."

They withdrew to a position behind some thick

succulents and waited. Ten, twenty minutes of silence,
at the end of which both giants were growing nervous
and fidgety. At about the twenty-fifth minute a small
brya—a four-footed, four-clawed herbivore about the
size of a pig—wandered toward the patch of blue while
rooting in the dense growth beneath it for edible

aerial tubers.

Again Born detected the fluttering around the fringe

of the sky, but didn't point it out to Cohoma and
124

Logan. He didn't have to—they saw it for themselves.

The brya wandered into the space beneath the sky.
When it was in the exact center, the sky fell, clouds
and all. The quivering clouder resembled a thick mat-
tress lined on its edges with hundreds of cilia. It
literally enveloped the brya, which squealed only once.
The clouder moved jerkily for a minute or two, then
relaxed.

Five minutes later the fringe of tentacles or cilia
extended. The clouder climbed back up to its nesting
place, stripping the surrounding vegetation in the proc-
ess to keep plenty of clear space beneath it. It settled
into place once more, four meters above the nearest
growth. It was pebbled and green on top. Its under-
side was shaded so much like a section of sky
speckled with clouds that Logan had to blink to make
sure it had really moved. A few bones, too tough for
even the clouder's supremely efficient digestive juices,
were carefully thrown clear once excreted.

"Camouflage, yes. Protective mimicry, yes," Logan
whispered. "But a carnivore that imitates the sky—"

Cohoma was equally awed, especially when he con-
sidered he might easily have gone the way of the
brya had not the furcots intervened.

Bom sighed and turned to lead on. "I am not sure
what that means, but the sky is the sky and a clouder
is a clouder. Walk under the last and soon see nothing."
He started back down the cubble. A suitably chastized
Logan and Cohoma followed, looking uneasily to then-
right as they passed the innocent-seeming circle of
blue and white.

"Just when you think you've got this ecosystem
figured," Cohoma mumbled, "got the predators and the
prey identified and cataloged, something like that
nearly snaps your head off. Carnivores that imitate the
sky! Next thing you know, Bom'U be warning us about
something that imitates nothing!"

Three days later they encountered the palinglass and
again barely escaped being consumed.

Weeks had passed. Many nights later they secured
an especially good camp in the hollow of a Pillar
branch. The wood-walled cave was more than large
125

enough to accommodate all six of them comfortably,

if it was unoccupied.

Born and Losting motioned for fhe two giants to
stay behind when they first saw the orifice. They then
approached the cavernous scar cautiously, loaded
snufflers held ready. It seemed unlikely that such a
fine, solid shelter, so spacious, would be devoid of

life.

Such was the case, however. Neither Ruumahum or

Geeliwan had detected any scent. When the hunters
entered the hollow, they found only very old drop-
pings, and more deadwood than they could use in

a hundred fires.

That night a lavish blaze illumined the interior of
the branch, reflecting off dark nodules and twisted
stalactites of cracked wood and bark. Born studied
the giants. Under the soothing effect of the fire and
the excellent shelter, he felt more inclined to talk than

he had for many days.

"I have almost come to believe that you truly come
from a world other than this, Kimilogan." Cohoma's
expression didn't change, but Logan appeared pleased.

"That's a big step, Bom, and an important one. I'm
not surprised, though, that you made it. You're ob-
viously the most perceptive of your people, and the
most receptive to change, to new ideas. That's going
to be very important." She stirred the coals nearest
her with a twisted stick, listened to the ever-steady
trickle of night-water outside. "You know, Bom,
when you and your people and the other tribes here
rejoin the family of man they're going to need some-
one to speak for them with our company." She glanced
up at him evenly. "I can't think of a better candidate
than yourself. With what you've already done for the
company in rescuing Jan and myself, I don't see
how you can help but be chosen. Such a position would
be very advantageous for you."

Losting listened to this and said nothing. His respect
for Bom's cleverness was as great as his dislike for
his person. He snuggled back against Geeliwan and lis-
tened to what Bom, not the giants, had to say.

"The world you say you come from does not sound

126

very inviting," Bom replied, and then held up a quiet-
ing hand as Cohoma seemed ready to object, "but
that is a matter of personal choice. Clearly you feel
much the same way toward this world. That is of no
matter." He paused thoughtfully, leaned forward to
lend emphasis to his next words. "What I wish to
know is—if you are so satisfied with your own world
and the others you say exist, why come with much
trouble and difficulty to this one?" Suddenly, his face
shadowed by the firelight, the hunter did not look
quite so primitive.

Cohoma and Logan exchanged glances. "Two rea-
sons, Bom," she finally replied. "One is simple to
understand; the other . . . well, I think you will,
in time. I don't know if chief Sand or Reader the
shaman would." She toyed with the stick, flicked a
glowing coal outward into the rain-drenched edge of
the cave. It hissed as the tepid drops struck it. "It has
to do with the acquisition of something called money,
which in turn has to do with commerce. All will be
made clear to you at the station. Once you under-
stand your own special position regarding it, you'll
see why I'm reluctant to go into details just yet. All
I will say is that you—and your people—will benefit
considerably, just as Jan and I and our friends will.

"The other thing is lesser for some men, more
important for others—curiosity. The same thing that
drove you to descend to find out what our skimmer
really was. The same thing that's driving you, against
your better judgment, against the advice of all your
friends, to try and return us safely to our station. It's
the same thing that's carried mankind and the thranx
fromstar to star—curiosity, and the other thing."

"What are thranx?" Bom asked.

"Some folk I think you'd like, Bom." She stared
out at the darkness. "And who'd like this world very
much, more so than my people."

"Are there any of these thranx at your station?"
Losting suddenly asked.

"No. None are a part of our"—she hesitated—"com-
pany, or group, organization, tribe, if you will." She
smiled brightly. "Everything will become much
clearer when we reach the station."

127

"I'm certain it will," Born mused agreeably, staring

into the dancing flames.

Later, as he rolled himself up in his cloak and over
into the softly snoring bulk of Ruumahum, he won-
dered if he would. He also wondered if he wanted to.

x

No one knows how silently a big animal can move
until an adult furcot has unexpectedly padded up
close to him. Ruumahum moved that way when the
odor woke him, rising so muffled-ear quiet even Bom,
lightest of sleepers, failed to awake. The aroma came
from outside and above, so heavy with its distinctive
musk it penetrated down through two levels and the
still falling rain. Geeliwan stirred in sleep as Ruuma-
hum padded to the front of the cavern. He stuck his
head outside, stared upward with triple piercing eyes,
which blinked frequently against the stinging rain.

The smell was unmistakable, but there was no
harm in making sure. He gripped the wood with fore-
legs, followed with the middle pair and then the hind,
and swung out onto the side of the trunk. Close-
bunched leg muscles worked in unison as he clawed
his way up the trunk. It was harder than finding
a spiraling path in the thick vegetation, but time was
important if his suspicion was correct. The hair behind
his ears bristled as the threatening miasma grew
stronger and stronger. Few sensory impressions can
raise the hackles of a furcot. Ruumahum was absorb-
ing one of them now.

The long vertical climb was tiring, even for him.
Then he saw it, still far above, but moving steadily
downward, and he knew why their excellent shelter
had been empty: This was a silverslith's tree.

It had their scent, that was certain. They were al-

128

ready dead, unless the persons could devise a new
thing. Turning, he rushed back down through branches
and vines, eating up the meters with prodigious
plunges and leaps. He was making enough noise to
rouse every night prowler nearby, which was the idea.
Perhaps one would be foolish enough to investigate.
The temporary snack might divert the silverslith for
a few precious minutes.

They had little time. The silverslith was moving
slowly, deliberately, playing with its intended prey.
And tile giants would slow them further. He burst
into the cave noisily enough to wake Bom and Losting
instantly. Geeliwan gave a warning growl, relaxed at
the familiar smell.

Ruumahum stood panting before them, wet fur
glistening in the glow from the coals. "Wake others,"
he puffed. While Losting moved to rouse the giants,
Ruumahum whispered something in the talk of furcots,
which prompted Geeliwan to hurry to the cave en-
trance. He stationed himself there, staring upward.

"What's going on? What is it now?" Cohoma
grumbled sleepily as Losting shook him. Logan had
already moved to a sitting position and waited to be
told.

"We must leave here immediately," Bom told
them. He fastened his cloak more tightly at his neck,
moved to gather his few things. Losting was doing
likewise. "This is a silverslith's tree. It explains why
we did not have to fight for this shelter. It is shunned,
as we should have shunned it. There was no reason
to suspect, none. I feel no better for it, though."

"All right," Logan asked tiredly, "another pesty
beast. What's a silverslith, Bom, and what can we do
about it?"

"Leave," he replied tightly, using a thick fragment
of wood to push the glowing embers from the fire
toward the cave mouth. The rain would put them
safely out.

"In the middle of the night?"

"The silverslith dictates this, not I, Kimilogan. We
can only run and weave, weave and run. There is a
chance it will tire and leave us."

"Something that will follow us, like the Akadi?" Co-
129




homa wondered. The seriousness of the situation had
finally penetrated his sleep-numbed brain.

"No, not like the Akadi. Compared to the silver-
slith, the mind of the Akadi is as changeable as ...
as"—he fumbled for a suitable analogy—"the desires
of a woman. Once having the scent of one who has
invaded its tree, the silverslith will follow till the in-
vader is eaten. Nor can it be outrun like the Akadi.
And unlike the Akadi, it does not sleep."

"Now that's got to be legend," Cohoma insisted,
rumbling with his cloak. "There's no such thing as a
warm-blooded creature that doesn't sleep, and only a
few cold-blooded ones can go without rest."

"I do not know the temperature of its blood," Born
commented, moving toward the cave mouth, "nor
even if it has blood. No one has ever seen a silver-
slith bleed. I will not banter with you now." Oddly
enough, he grinned. "When you are tired from run-
ning, I suggest you stop for a nap and see what wakes
you in the night."

"Okay, we believe you," Logan confessed, trying to
arrange her clothes. "We've got to, after what we've
seen. A creature whose living cycle runs in weeks
instead of days. So many weeks of wakefulness, so
many weeks of sleep."

"The silverslith does not sleep," Bom reiterated
forcefully. Deciding it was useless to argue with those
who refused to accept the truth, he finally made a
curt gesture to them to follow.

Losting had prepared torches, bundles of torches.
But they still had to locate the globular leaves that
would shield the flame from the ram, and there was no
time to look. They had to get away from the tree.
Hopefully they would encounter some of the fairly
common growths along the way. Until then they would
be forced to make their way in darkness.

"Quickly," Ruumahum growled with furcot impa-
tience. "It senses us."

"Geeliwan!" Losting whispered. The furcot moved to
the nearest liana, jumped from it to a lower branch
growing from another tree, down to another and
another. Then it looked back up, eyes gleaming in
130

the night. They would be the only beacons they had
in the forest.

Losting went next, followed by Cohoma. Logan
looked back up at Bom as she was about to move to
the liana. "I thought it was too dangerous to travel
at night?"

"It is," he admitted, "but it is death to stay
here."

She nodded. "Just wanted to make sure this wasn't
some kind of test," she replied cryptically, turning and
moving from liana to branch.

Bom hesitated long enough to murmur to Ruuma-
hum as the furcot stared upward into the rain. "How
much time?"

"It will search every niche of cave. Then follow."

"Any chance we could fight it, old friend?" Ruuma-
hum snorted.

"Bom dreams. Fight silverslith? Not even silverslith-
young." His gaze went upward again. "Not young.
Old one, big. Very big."

Bom grunted nonconunittally, glanced upward. He
had another new thought. It was a frightening thought,
but nothing else offered itself in substitution, and there
was no time for detailed speculation. They could prob-
ably stay ahead of the silverslith. But they could not
run away and leave it, nor could they shake it from
their trail, or fight it. Eventually fatigue would slow
them, stop them, and the untiring killer would finish
them at its leisure. Still reluctant to propose the
thought, he moved rapidly with the others away from
the tree.

They had been traveling for some time when faint
thunder boomed across the forest from somewhere
behind them. It was caused by an abrupt displace-
ment of air, but its source was not electrical in nature.

"It has discovered our absence," Bom explained to
Logan, in response to the unvoiced question. "It will
spend a few minutes voicing its rage and then come
after."

"Tell me, Bom," she asked, straggling to stay be-
hind the vague shape of Losting working his way
through the dense growth, "if a silverslith never gives
up till its quarry is killed, how do you know so much

131

about its habits, and what it looks like? You do know
what it looks like?"

The giant was wasting too much energy on talk.
Ever polite, he responded, "There are tales of a
party of twenty or thirty being attacked by one. They
scattered in as many directions. Not even a silverslith
could follow every scent to its source before some
had faded. A few survived to tell of the monster."

"You're saying not even twenty or thirty of
you..."

"And as many furcots."

". . . and then: furcots could fight one of these
things?"

"Too big, too strong," Bora. told her.

"I thought your jacari poison would kill anything."

"Silverslith skin is too thick," he explained. "Also,
jacari poison works on ... on"—he searched his
memory for the ancient term—"the nervous system."

"Then why wouldn't it affect a silverslith?" Cohoma
asked. "It's got to have some vulnerable points."

"When it comes, you show me," Bom muttered.
"Anyway, silverslith has no nervous system, the tale
says."

Logan's willingness to credit the creature with the
ability to go long periods without rest or sleep did
not extend this far. "Oh, come on, Bom," she said
with the confidence of superior knowledge, "every
animal has a nervous system."

"Has it?"

"An animal couldn't live without a nervous system,
Born."

"Couldn't it?"

"At the very least," she added, "it must have some
kind of rudimentary brain and central locomotor sys-
tem."

"Must it?"

She gave up. Cohoma hadn't paid much attention.
He was still musing on the fact that this thing pursu-
ing them could put thirty furcots to flight.

"Look, how much of this is true and how much of
it has been embroidered by the survivors of that at-
tacked party? Naturally they'd want to make out the
invulnerability of anything that forced them to run."

132

Bom was about to reply, but Ruumahum interrupted
him. It was unusual for a furcot to break into a
conversation between persons. Ruumahum did so to
keep Bora's adrenalin level low until more energy was
needed later. "Silverslith tree," he growled softly,
"only thing in world Akadi change march-path for.
Big persons shut up now and watch own path."

That information was enough to cause Logan and
Cohoma to overlook the fact that they had been
given an order by an overgrown pet. They pondered
it as they hurried on in silence.

Meanwhile Bom continued to turn his earlier
thought over and over in his head. He tried to argue
his way out of it; it held him tight as a grazer's
arm. He tried to avoid it; it stood firmly in the
way of his thoughts like the silverslith's Pillar-tree.
Temporarily he managed to forget it by cursing him-
self for failing to recognize the tree for what it was.
That huge, dry, inviting shelter, so empty, so shunned.
Fool! "Fool's fool!" he muttered aloud.

"And I with you," Losting muttered nearby, but
Born hardly heard him.

"Don't berate yourself. Born. You said there was
no way of telling what it was," Logan told him.

"No. If it had been lower, Ruumahum would have
scented it. But it was far, far up the trunk, near the
very top probably, hell-hunting."

"Hell-hunting?"

"Fishing the night sky for air-demons," he ex-
plained. "Reaching up to pull down fliers at the

treetops, like the one that attacked your skimmer
when it fell."

"Oh," she murmured. Another sobering thought.
"It did not sense us till it started downward. That's
when Ruumahum smelled it."

They finally found the globular leaves growing to
one side of their treepath. Geeliwan saw them, moved
with Ruumahum to stand watch while Bom and Lost-
ing cut and prepared several. Though if the silverslith
attacked, they could give the humans only a couple
of extra minutes.

A little of ihe fire pollen and they had real light
again. It cheered Cohoma and Logan. At least they

133

could see where they were stepping now. At the
same time, Logan expressed a new worry to Bom.
"Won't these make us easier to see for any other local

predators?"

"It does not matter now. Tha silverslith is too close.

No other creature of the night will come near, having
scented it. They will run, too. Have you noticed the

silence?"
Logan listened and knew what Bom meant. The

usual night sounds, the normal whistles and clicks,
beepings and hums interspersed with an occasional
deep-throated roar, were missing. Only the constant
drip, drip of the rain remained, punctuated by a wan-
dering wisp of lost wind. They hurried on in eerie

silence.

"It nears," Ruumahum soon rasped. "Slowly, but

it nears."

"I'm sorry, I'm sorry, Bom," Logan said at the
same time, gasping, fighting for breath. "I can't keep
this up. I don't know which'U go first, my eyes or

my legs."

"Then," Bom said, sighing heavily, making the de-
cision he had been putting off for hours, "it is better

to start now."

"Start where?" The query came from Losting.

"Down ... to the other levels."

Neither Losting nor the giants cared if the mon-
strous apparition now close on their trail heard their

shouts and yells.

"What's the good of descending to another level?"

"We'll only lose the daylight when it comes."

"The silverslith will follow us easily," Losting

added. "Follow us forever. You know that, Bom."
Bom looked at his ally and rival. "Even to Hell?"
That was the first and last time either Cohoma or

Logan ever heard a furcot produce anything like a

startled grunt. Losting was too stunned to reply as Bom

continued.

"I will not stay to argue with you, Losting, or with

any of you. I am going down to the Seventh Level,
if the silverslith still follows. Down to whatever is

there."

"Death is there," Geeliwan sighed.

134

"Death to wait here, sleek friend," Bom reminded.
He looked ahead to Losting again. "We know what
the silverslith will do when it catches us. At the very
least, we may find a new way to die."

"Bom, you said yourself that to go to the Lower
Hell, the surface, was certain death," Logan said
softly.

"Less certain than to stay here. Maybe the silver-
slith will not follow, for it lives here near the top of
the world. It may live equally well among its rela-
tions at its bottom, but we do not know that. I think
it is a chance, at least. I will not try to force any
of you to come with me."

He would do what he thought best, assuming
the others would see the wisdom of his ways and
follow him. That was what he had always done. It
worked now as he began the slow descent to depths
unseen, plunging into even blacker, more ominous
darkness.

They followed, all of them, but not out of respect
for his greater wisdom, as he thought. They followed
because in a crisis, uncertain people will follow
whatever leader declares himself. In that respect Lost-
ing proved himself as human as Logan or Cohoma.

Cubbies and lianas came and went. Downward-
sloping tree branches, parasitic growths the size of
sequoias and greater passed and were left behind.
One such tree sprouted a thousand thick air-roots all
entwined. They used them to drop with greater speed
for many meters. They left the Fifth Level behind and
entered the Sixth, moving into a region of brown and
white and purple growths that started crowding out
the green.

Then they were through the center of the Sixth,
then through its bottom, to emerge into a ghost world.
A world feebly lit by torchlight that seemed to huddle
close to its parent wood in fear. A world of Pillar-
tree bases with boles as big around as starships.
Buttresses, multibladed and massive, rose on all sides.
There were glowing fungi the size of storerooms, which
thrived and grew in a riotous profusion of obscene,
grotesque shapes. Small glowing things crawled in and
among them and hid from their torchlight.

135




Here there was no morning and no evening, no day
and no night—only a perpetual darkness that be-
longed neither to the sun or the moon. Even though
the phosphorescent fungi and their twisted relatives
gave enough light to see by, the torches were kept lit.
It was a cleaner, purer radiance than what shone here.
Yellow and red and white light issued from around
them, a ghostly, ethereal evanescence, which sug-
gested outlines rather than whole forms, hinted rather

than described.

At last they came to a stop at the base of one
ridge-backed buttress, the final stairway to the surface.
A cluster of orange saplinglike growths grew here—
things that would never know the internal logic-
magic of photosynthesis. They had surely reached the
ground, the Seventh Level, Lower Hell itself. Yet,
there seemed even here to be another level below, for
nearby the ground turned soft, sticky and wet, thicker
than water, thinner than mud.

Logan turned, breathing painfully, and stared back
up the way they had come. The buttress behind her
was like a dark brown-black cliff. Above it she could
detect only darkness and the faint glow of distant
fungi. There was nothing to indicate that a couple
of hundred meters above them was a world of light
and green life that pulsed and rustled with wind and

rain.

It was humid here to the point of suffocation, though
only an occasional persistent droplet from the still
falling night-rain penetrated this far. The rest had
been absorbed or caught high above by a thousand
million bromeliads or other water-holding plants. The
rare drop was a reminder that they had not died, that
a living green world still existed above this dark place.

Bom also turned his gaze upward along the face of
the wood, solid as granite. "Ruumahum?"

"It comes still," the furcot muttered after testing
the air. "But slower, much slower, even cautiously."

"We have no time for caution." He turned to Logan
and Cohoma, indicated the swampy morass which
spread around their tiny, dry peninsula. "I know
nothing of footing like this. Yet we must leave this
spot before the silverslith's fury overcomes its care."

Long moments, precious moments, came and went
while all four humans considered the problem. Logan
found herself running a hand up and down the side
of one of the orange trunks that flared from where
the buttress of the great tree entered the water. More
than anything else they resembled bright red-orange
reeds, though they surely were no member of the
reed family.

She took out her bone knife and tried the material.
It cut, but not easily. The fiber was dense, not pulpy
or water-filled, but they had axes. "Bom, see if you
can locate something that would serve as cord. Some
kind of vine or something. I think these will make
a decent raft—a machine for traveling on the water-
if we stack them crossways two deep."

They worked so fast it was a wonder no one lost
an arm or leg in the building. As each orange bole
was felled, it exuded a thick odor redolent of stale
onion. Construction proceeded apace when Bom and
Ruumahum returned with loops and loops of some
sticky, gray waterplant coiled around themselves.

Logan and Cohoma laid and held the "logs" and
instructed Bom and Losting on how and where to set
the ties. All the while, Ruumahum and Geeliwan kept
watch on a ridge above.

Their periodic guttural warnings, shouted down from
high up on the buttress, indicated that the silverslith,
was still moving and with that same unnatural slow-
ness. It did not occur to anyone to wonder at the
monster's caution.

It did, however, occur to Logan suddenly to ask,
"Bom, we didn't ask permission, emfol, whatever,
of these, did we? Isn't that against your religion,
or moral stance, or something?" She indicated the
felled logs.

"They are not of the forest, of my world." He
looked disgusted. "They are a kind of life I feel only
distantly akin too. I cannot emfol with them. There is
nothing to emfol with."

"It's finished," Cohoma announced loudly, forcing
Logan to stifle further questions. Fascinating as this
still unresolved thing called emfoling was, survival was
more important.

A shout drifted down to them. "Quickly, Bom!"
Ruumahum again. "It sees us. It comes fast now."

Seconds later, it seemed, both furcots had rejoined
them at the base of the buttress. The hair was erect
on their necks, and they glanced continually upward.
Logan stared up also, as did Cohoma, but as yet there
was nothing to be seen. Their meager equipment
thrown aboard, the two furcots climbed on. At least
there was no space problem. The raft was big enough
to hold twice as many men and furcots. Cohoma,
Bom, Logan, and Losting all shoved, lifted and
shoved. The raft refused to budge.

"Ruumahum, Geeliwan," Cohoma directed, "move
to the far end of the raft a little!" The furcots did
so, and this time when the humans shoved, the raft
slid cleanly into the brown sludge.

The first thing Cohoma did was test the depth of
the muck. The split section of tapering reed disap-
peared until his fist was immersed. They would not be
wading through this.

The thick liquid made for slow paddling, but by
the same token, it also helped support the makeshift
raft. Everyone pushed furiously, their progress ham-
pered initially by Losting and Bom's ignorance of
paddle mechanics. But they learned quickly. With in-
creasing speed they made their way out a considerable
distance from the shore.

Above them the black sky arched high overhead.
It was like rowing silently through some unimagi-
nably vast, dark cathedral. The vegetation growing on
the little patches of dry earth and on the trunks of
dead or living, trees was dense, but there was no furi-
ous desire to reach for open space here, since there
was no need to compete for the sun.

"Where's the tree we came down?" Logan asked.
She squinted back the way she thought they had come.
Everything beyond a certain distance looked the same,
since the light from the glowing fungi did not reach
very far. Then she saw the thing and knew which
bole it was they had come down, and what a silverslith
was, and she screamed.

It stopped when it reached the base of the buttress
—at least the front part of it stopped there. The rest
138

of it extended back up the tree, up and up into the
blackness beyond for an unknown distance. Its body
was a fifth as big around as the Pillar-tree itself.
It looked like an animated forest, its cylindrical body
bristling with thousands of independently writhing
cilia the color of polished antimony. They reached
and clutched at the air. The head was a bloated hor-
ror, a creation of an aberrant nature. Numerous pul-
sating mouths dotted the globular head, gray teeth
sprouting in every direction. Tentacles grew around
the mouths seemingly at random, and the whole nau-
seating visage was liberally pockmarked with feature-
less black blots that may have been eyes.

It uttered low mewling sounds, incongruously soft.
These rose and shifted to a high, piping titter that sent
icy chills through Cohoma and Logan. The head alone
stretched out many meters over the water. It swung
slowly from side to side as if it were smelling the
surface. Then the head lifted. Though those black
orbs went in all directions, it felt to Cohoma as
if it were staring directly at them.

"Oh, my god, my god," Logan croaked. "It's seen
us."

"Not like this . . . not this way," Cohoma was
moaning.

"Be quiet and—what do you call it—paddle!" Bom
growled through clenched teeth, though he was as
frightened as the giants, and fresh sweat dropped from
his forehead.

They had gamed real distance on the raft and were
well out on the water. But the silverslith had pursued
them into Hell itself. Bom sensed that it was not about
to be deprived of its prey.

It reached out for them, mewling loudly. More of
that seemingly endless body flowed in humping motions
down the Pillar trunk and along the buttress, and
still the tail was not visible. It was not yet trying to
swim. Instead it was stretching to the left, reaching
for the buttress of the next major growth.

Bom saw with despair that by moving in this
fashion, it would soon be able to pluck them from the
false safety of the raft without ever having to touch
water. Losting saw it too, and together the hunters
139




began a frantic search for a crevice, a crack in the
base of one of the enormous boles where they might
hide, though such was the strength of the silverslith
that it would rip even those huge boles apart to get
at them.

A faint rushing noise sounded behind them, like a
child stepping into a vat of grazer lard. Then the
water erupted, vomiting forth a colossal, soulless shape
so vast it could not be believed. The thing occupied
the whole broad basin of open water they had just
crossed.

The behemoth ignored them just as Born would
ignore a leaf falling on his head in the forest. They
were not worth bothering with. Long multijointed legs
with claws the size of small trees shot out and hooked
around the stretching form of the silverslith. A single
eye bigger than the giants' skimmer flashed for a
merciful instant between those taloned legs. What they
could see of its body, where it emerged from the
water, was a mad hybrid of the sacred and the pro-
fane. For it was encrusted with jewels—emeralds and
sapphires, topaz and tormaline, set in weaving patterns
of natural luminescence. It was overpoweringly beau-
tiful, awesome, terrifying.

Everyone fell and held tightly to the orange logs
and gray lashings as the raft began to rock, caught
in the turbulence spawned by that titanic battle. Born
knew nothing of swimming and tried to conceive of
breathing water. He decided he would rather be eaten.

Hours later, it seemed, the rocking finally subsided.
When Born was able to raise his head, the first thing
he saw was Ruumahum and Geeliwan standing side
by side at the rear of the raft. The furcots were star-
ing at the water behind them. Born struggled to his
knees. There was nothing behind them now but silence
—silence and the far-off shining shapes of distorted
fungi and lichens lit by their own cold, internal light.
And distantly, a soft bubbling sound, which A child
might have made by blowing into water. Of the silver-
slith and the hell-born that had come to meet it,
there was no sign.

Logan sat up, emotionally and physically exhausted.
She wiped the hair out of her eyes and tried to get

140

her heartbeat under control, with little success. Bom
watched her for a moment, found his paddle where
he had shoved it between two logs, and then resumed
paddling.

"Which way, Jancohoma?" he asked. There was no
reply. "Jancohoma, which way?" he repeated, more
loudly.

Cohoma pulled out the compass, found his hand
was shaking too badly to take a reading. He grabbed
his right wrist with his left hand and stared at the
luminous face. "Better . . . better turn us a little to
the right here, Bom. A little more . . . more . . .
Losting, don't you paddle yet. There, now paddle to-
gether."

They forced themselves not to think of what they
might be paddling over, of what a touch of the paddle
might stir to wakefulness. They were almost too tired
to care.

Logan leaned back, lay down on the smelly logs and
stared up at a tiny universe formed by glowing mush-
roomlike things growing upside down from the bottom
of a major branch high above. "You wouldn't think
hell could be so beautiful." Her expression twisted, and
she suddenly looked over her shoulder at Cohoma. He
sat behind her, his head between his arms, and he
was shaking. "Jan, if we meet another raft, let's ask
its pilot directions, even if he's got a three-headed dog
with him."

"I don't like dogs," Cohoma replied flatly. From his
tone, one might almost believe he took the suggestion
seriously.

There was no sunrise to bring peace to the tiny
knot of humans and furcots who rode the orange speck
between wooden towers, beneath a black sky speckled
with pseudostars. On what should have been the
morning of the following day they were attacked
twice in the space of fifteen minutes. They saw noth-
ing till they were set upon. Fortunately, neither of the
creatures was bigger than a man. They encountered
nothing which approached the size of the armored
colossus which had attacked the silverslith.

The first assault came from the air, in the form of
a four-winged flier equipped with a long mouth full
141

of needlelike teeth. It dove silently at them from be-
tween the soaring roots of a great tree. Enormous
goggling eyes gave Losting time to sound a warning.
Its first dive missed completely and it hooked around,
wheezing like an old man. Both hunters were readying
their smuflers for the second swoop. They never had
a chance to use them.

Rearing up on hind legs, Ruumahum brought pow-
erful forepaws together. They closed on one wing, and
the flier screeched, crumpling to the raft. The long
jaws snapped frantically till Geeliwan shattered its skull
with a single swipe of a clawed paw.

No sooner had the carcass been disposed of than
something that resembled a pineapple with sixteen long
thin legs tried to crawl onto the deck. Axes rose and
fell on articulated limbs until the crippled carnivore
slipped back into the slime.

"Internal lights can attract others of the same spe-
cies for purposes of mating," Logan mused, "as with
certain deep-sea fish on Terra and Repler. They can
also draw predators. Born, Losting, put out your
torches."

The hunters looked doubtful. A man caught at night
in the hylaea without light had no chance to see his
enemy, but Logan and Cohoma managed to persuade
them to try it. Reluctantly they removed the protective
globes and dipped the torches in the water, but not
before two fresh ones were readied just in case.

They were not used. With the torches out, their
eyes adjusted to the lesser light emanating from the
glowing life around them. There was still enough to
make out their course between the tree boles which
supported the world above. And they were not at-
tacked again.

They had been traveling on the raft for several hours
when Born discovered he was thirsty. He dropped to
his knees and bent his head to the murky water.

"Wait, Bom!" Logan yelled. "It might not-"

She need not have bothered. Bom's nose wrinkled
as the noxious smell struck him. He had no advanced
degrees, no knowledge of biochemistry to draw on. His
nose was sufficient to tell him that the substance they
were gliding on was not fit to drink. He told the
others as much.

*s,.

"Hardly surprising," Cohoma commented. He turned
his gaze upward. "The bacterial count in this swamp
must be nothing short of astronomical. When you con-
sider how many tons . . . tons of already decomposing
animal and vegetable matter fall on every square ki-
lometer of the surface every day . . . Then consider
the stifling heat down here." He mopped his forehead.
"And the daily rainfall. You can figure this world is
built on a sea of liquefied peat and compost the
Church only knows how deep!"

"Obviously these trees, despite their enormous re-
quirements, can't handle all the rainfall," Logan ven-
tured thoughtfully. She leaned back on the drifting raft
and stared at the bole of the growth passing on their
right. It was not quite as big around as an interstel-
lar cargo carrier. "I'd like to know how some of these
half-ldlometer-high emergents draw water from the
surface and pump it to that height."

"I'd hate like hell to paddle this thing past the sta-
tion before we climb again," Cohoma suddenly
mused. "We know our direction, but we've no way of
estimating our daily progress."

"Born and Losting know how to judge distance."

Cohoma smiled. "Sure, through the treepaths. Not
on this." He indicated the raft, then turned to face
Born. "What do you think?" he asked the hunter.
"Don't we stand a better chance in the canopy than
down here, as long as we don't chose the wrong
hidey-hole the next time we feel like a nap!"

"I have been watching for a good way up ever
since we left the dwelling place of the surface demon,"
he replied. "We must begin our return to the world
soon anyway. See?" He pointed ahead and downward
while Losting paddled on grimly, scanning the mam-
moth roots and buttresses for one the giants could
climb.

As Cohoma and Logan stared, Bom dug down into
the orange log with his heel. A shallow groove ap-
peared. Then he drew his leg up and brought his heel
down on the log. It disappeared, his foot vanishing up
to the, ankle in the orange punk. When he tugged it
free, a yellowish-brown suppuration oozed from the
break. The hole did not fill in.

"What was it you said about bacterial action and
decomposition here, Jan?" Logan muttered sardoni-
cally. She turned to survey the slowly passing, glowing
dreamscape. "Bom's right; if we don't find a place
to land soon, this raft's going to dissolve right under
us."

The murky, thick soup of the surface was lapping
their ankles when Losting finally located a possible
stairway leading them. upward. A wooden peninsula
was formed by the twisting bulk of a great root, which
extended horizontally into the water before disappear-
ing. Instead of shooting a hundred meters skyward in
precipitous vertical assault, the root curved gently into
the central trunk.

Some hard paddling grounded the shaky craft on
the hardwood beach. None too soon, for instead of
resisting or splintering, the front fifth of the raft col-
lapsed on contact. A quick study showed that it could
not have carried them more than a kilometer or so
further. Nearly all the logs were rotted at least half
through. More damaging was the fact that most of the
gray lashings Born had found were completely gone.
Had they remained on the raft much longer, they
would have come to an abrupt, not gradual, end, as
the lashings gave out and the logs came apart beneath
them.

Once up the easy ramp provided by the great curved
root there were knobs and protrusions which would
make climbing manageable. Even so, going up was
going to be quite a different proposition from their
rapid descent.

Cohoma voiced Logan's sentiments as well as his
own. "We're going to climb that?"

"All men can fly," Bom mused, "but sadly, only in
one direction—down. I'm afraid we must. Losting and
I will go first and search out the easiest way, so that
even a child might ascend in confidence. You will
follow." He turned to the furcots. Geeliwan yawned
noisily as he spoke. "Follow the friends closely. Do
not let them fall," he ordered.

"Understand," Ruumahum snorted. "Follow close.
Will care for." The massive skull swung around for
a last thoughtful look, white tusks gleaming in the
144

misty phosphorescence that surrounded them. "Go
now. Something comes."

K either Logan or Cohoma had entertained thoughts
of arguing for another avenue of ascent, perhaps one
still less perpendicular, Ruumahum's curt warning was
enough to send them hurriedly up the chosen route.

"We've been left alone since extinguishing our
torches," Logan puffed. "Why would anything sud-
denly attack us now? I thought we had made ourselves
pretty inconspicuous."

'"Your eyes have grown used to the light here," Bom
shouted back to her. "Look down at yourselves."

Logan stared down at her protesting legs, and her
breath drew in sharply. She was flickering like a thou-
sand tiny lasers. Legs, feet, torso—all glittered crimson
and yellow with light of their own. Life of their own.
She held her hands out in front of her and even as she
watched, the photonic effluence spread to her arms.
Then she could feel a faint, feathery tickling spread
across her face, and she brushed frantically at eyes,
nostrils, and mouth.

She fought down the panic when the feathery touch
remained no more than that. Born was shining now,
too, and Losting. She saw Jan staring at her, his elec-
trified face a mirror of her own. Behind them, Ruuma-
hum and Geeliwan were rippling streaks of light.

A spine-quaking moan reverberated in the distance
behind them. They redoubled their efforts.

Actually the climb was not that difficult from a tech-
nical standpoint, merely nerve-wracking and arduous.
It seemed to Logan that they had been climbing for
days instead of hours.

Once it grew darker for long moments as the lumi-
nescent fungi and lichen and mosses grew fewer and
fewer. Another dozen meters and the first light from
above reached them, feeble, tenuous probing of a far
distant sun. Their acquired illumination left them at
the same time. Logan slowed long enough to examine
her glistening palms. The infinitesimal lights shifted
and flowed, then began fading in a cloud from the
skin. Tiny, incredibly tiny fliers, living light specks.
That single soul-freezing moan had now faded be-
hind them, but it was no wonder they had suddenly

145

become quarry for a while. For the billion glowmites
that had slowly gathered to them must have turned
the moving forms of man and furcot into fiery silhou-
ettes in the darkness, flickering, brilliant beacons beck-
oning to photosensitive predators. Another symbiotic
marriage, she mused. This world offered hundreds
and hundreds of such, in places unexpected and
unique.

They rose into thicker and thicker growth, not fungi
now, but the stygian precursors of real plants. The first
pale shadows formed by sunlight were like answers to
prayers.

First they climbed the air-roots that dangled from
the larger parasitic trees and vines, then those of the
lesser epiphytes and bushes. Eventually they emerged
into the first leaves—enormous disks barely kissed with
green. Some were more than five and six meters wide,
designed to catch even the slightest hint of sun from
above.

Fungi still flourished here, but reduced to a friendly,
unthreatening size—not the nightmare colossi of the
Seventh Level. Gigantic ferns, ivies, and unclassifi-
able bryophytes still crowded out flowering plants.

"Please, let's stop here," pleaded an exhausted Co-
homa, settling down on a wide vine overgrown with a
diamond-patterned ivy. "For a minute, just a minute,
please." Logan collapsed alongside him.

Born cast a questioning glance back at Ruumahum.
The furcot was looking back along their precipitous
path, long ears cocked forward and down, listening
intently. Then he turned. "Not climber, not follow.
Danger gone."

What seemed to Cohoma only seconds later. Born
tested a dangling root. A gratifying tug and he was
pulling himself up the helical formation. Losting fol-
lowed behind, his snumer clattering against his cape.
Cohoma looked at his partner, muttered something
else Born would not have understood, and started to
follow. Logan sighed, stood up and tried to stretch
the kink from her neck. She found it led only to strains
in other muscles. She grabbed the root and began
climbing. Ruumahum and Geeliwan chose their own
path.

146

Additional hours of hard climbing carried them
into something approaching a foggy twilight, where
one finally could see without squinting. This time it
was Logan's turn to announce she could not move a
step farther. Bom and Losting consulted as the two
giants collapsed in a bed of rectangular leaves so thick
they looked like little boxes.

"Very well," Bom told them, "we will stay the night
here."

"The night?" Cohoma wondered aloud. "But when
the silverslith chased us out of that tree, it was already
night."

"You must leam to read the light," Bom told him.
"The sun is dying, not budding. We have traveled the
rest of that night and run the following day. There is
little enough time left for preparing a fire and shelter."

"Wait a minute. How do you know the sun's going
down and not rising?"

Bom waved at the surrounding forest. "One has
only to emfol."

"Never mind," Cohoma grunted. "I'll take your
word for it, Bom." His expression changed. "Are you
and Losting going to hunt, or are we going to have to
masticate that boot material you call dried meat
again?"

Bom was unpacking his axe. "No time left to hunt,
unless you would prefer fresh meat to shelter?"

"No thanks," Logan cut in. "I'd rather be dry—you
have enough time?"

"There are many dead branches and dying leaves
here," Bom told them. "And as low as we are in the
world, drip water will not penetrate till late at night.
Besides, this is still a region unfamiliar to us, this Sixth
Level. Some of the forest growth is familiar, but some
is not. The same is true of the sounds, and probably of
the sound-makers. Not a good time to go exploring,
the evening."

"We will eat what we brought with us," Losting
said. "Tomorrow we can climb to the Third Level
and hunt for fresh game, find fruit and nutmeats. For
now, be glad of what you have."

"Look," Cohoma explained, "don't get the idea I
was complaining or anything." He remembered that
147

they were here due to Bom's recHessness and curi-
osity, not Losting's. "The steady change in our diet
these past weeks has been kind of a shock to my in-
nards."

"Do you think this is a feast for us?" Born re-
minded him, and he and Losting moved off to search
for any of the platterlike green disks they had passed
that showed signs of blight or disease.

Cohoma leaned back in the foliage until the two
hunters had disappeared into the green wall. Then he
rolled over and watched Logan, who was busy with
the compass. '"Still on course?"

She shrugged. "As near as I can tell, Jan. You
know, what you said before is true. We have to hit the
station dead on. We've got three chances to miss it—
by going under it, too far right, or too far left."

He picked at the leaf they were sitting on. "I wish
we hadn't had to make that surface detour, damnit."

"Could hardly be helped. What's the matter, Jan,
didn't you find it interesting?"

"Interesting?" He let out a sinister chuckle. "It's one
thing to study alien aberrations from the skimmer in
back of a laser cannon. Being eaten alive by an entry
in the catalog is the kind of experience I can do
without."

"We're going to have a problem soon, you know."

"Oh, you're full of surprises, Kimi, you are."

"Seriously. If we're not going to risk missing the
station, we're going to have to convince our friends of
the need of traveling near the treetops. With their sense
of distance thrown off by our little raft ride, the
sooner we move up in the world, the better."

"The station's built only a little ways into the can-
opy, true."

"And Bom and his people," she continued, "are
deathly afraid of the sky. Not as much as they are of
the surface, though." She looked thoughtful. "With that
successfully survived now, maybe he'll be a little less
reluctant to move upward. Remember, he doesn't
know the station is located at the top of the First
Level. He may have come to half believe we do come
from a world other than this one. I think that's more
likely to find place in his imagination than the possi-

148

bility we might chose to live here in his Upper Hell."

Cohoma shook his head. "I still wish I understood
what this emfol business is all about. It would seem to
be some kind of adaptive worship of the undergrowth."

Logan nodded. "Is it surprising they'd look under-
foot for succor and supernatural aid? The bottom of
their world is hell, and so is the upper. That leaves
them neatly sandwiched in between, with no way out.
Naturally their development would proceed along re-
stricted, unorthodox lines. It's too bad, in a way. Born,
the chiefs Sand and Joyla, and several others have a
kind of nobility about them."

Cohoma snorted, rolled over. "The biggest mistake
an objective observer on a world like this can make is
to romanticize the primitive. And in the case of these
people, even that's not valid. They're not true primi-
tives, only regressed survivors of people like our-
selves."

"Tell me, Jan," she murmured, "is it really regres-
sion, or is it progression along an alien path?"

"Huh? What's that you said?"

"Nothing ... nothing. I'm tired, that's all."

IX

The meal of tough dried fruit and tougher meat was
long concluded when the sleepless Logan finally edged
over to where Bom was sitting. The hunter was rest-
ing close to the fire, his back pushed up against the
bulk of the snoring Ruumahum. Losting was already
asleep at the far end of the large, crude lean-to.
Wrapped awkwardly in his brown cloak, her partner
dozed fitfully.

There was one important question she wanted to re-
solve now. "Tell me, Bom, do you and your people
believe in a god?"

149

"A god or gods?" he replied interestedly, at least
not offended by the question.

"No, a single god. One all-powerful, all-seeing intel-
ligence that directs the affairs of the universe, that ac-
counts for and plans everything."

"That implies the absence of free will," Bom re-
sponded, surprising her as he sometimes did with a
very unprimitive reply.

"Some accept that, too," she admitted.

"I accept nothing of it, nor do any I know," he told
her. "There is far too much in this world for any one
being to keep account of it all. And you say there are
other worlds as complex as this, too?" He smiled. "No,
we do not believe such."

At least she could go to Hansen with that much,
now. It was too bad. Belief in the existence of a single
god would imply a fixed set of ethical and moral pre-
cepts on which to base certain proposals and regula-
tions. Spiritual anarchy made dealings with primitive
people more difficult. One couldn't call on a higher au-
thority to serve as a binding agency. Well, that was a
problem for Hansen and whatever xenosociologists
the company chose to send in to deal with Bom's
people. She started to turn away, then hesitated. K she
could at least-plant that seed in Bom's mind ...

"Born, has it occurred to you that we've had incred-
ible luck on this journey?"

"I do not call sleeping in a silverslith's tree good
luck."

"But we escaped it, Bom. And there've been any
one of a dozen . . . no, several dozen times we could
all have been killed. Yet we haven't even suffered a
minor injury, beyond the usual nicks and scrapes."

That caused him to think a minute, as she had in-
tended. Finally he murmured, "I am a great hunter.
Losting is a good hunter, and Ruumahum and Geeli-
wan are wise and experienced. Why should we not
have been as successful as we have?"

"You don't think it strange, despite the fact that five
days' journey is the longest any of your people have
ever traveled from the Home before and returned?"

"We have not yet reached our destination, or re-
turned," he countered quietly.
150

"That's so," she admitted, edging back toward her
own sleeping place. "So you don't think this implies
the intervention of a guiding, watchful presence, like
a god? One who always knows what's good for you
and watches over you?"

Born looked solemn. "It did not watch over us
when the Akadi came, but I will think on it." And he
turned away from her.

She had planted the seed. Satisfied with that and
with what Hansen would have to say about it, she
rolled up in her cloak and closed her eyes. Not that
there were any missionaries at the station who would
thank her. The station was hardly a Church-blessed
enterprise. The steady drip of rain trickling down to
this level through a million leaves and petals and stems
formed a lulling rhythm on the lean-to roof, allowing
her finally to fall asleep.

"We've got to go up to the top of the First Level,
Born," Logan insisted the next day.

Born shook his head. "Too dangerous to travel so
much in the sky."

"No, no," she went on in exasperation. "We don't
have to stick our heads out into open air. We can
stay a good twenty-five meters," and she translated
that into percentage of level for him, "below the top-
most leaves. No sky-demon is going to dive through
that much brush to get at you."

"The First Level has dangers of its own," Born
countered defensively. "They are smaller than those
of the Home level, but faster, harder to find and kill
before they strike."

"Look, Born," Cohoma tried to explain, "we could
miss the station completely if we travel below that
point. It's constructed—like our skimmer—out of ma-
terials set down into the forest top, but not far into
it. If we miss it and have to try and backtrack, we
could get so confused as to direction that we'd never
be able to find it. We could wander around in this
jungle for years." For emphasis, he grabbed the com-
pass, showed it again to Bo and Losting as though
they could comprehend its principle. "See this direc-
tion finder of ours? It works best the first time you
151

hunt with it for a place. It grows less useful with each
successive failure."

Eventually Born gave in, as Logan suspected he
would. Their iconoclastic hunter had only two choices
—take then- advice now, or abort the journey. After
all they had been through, she did not think he
would suggest the latter.

So they continued upward. Gradually this time, not
in a muscle-killing vertical climb, but on a slant. In
this manner they moved forward as well as higher,
through the Fifth Level, the Fourth, and Third. She
could sense their reluctance to leave those comforting,
familiar surroundings for the danger and uncertainty
of the upper canopy. Both she and Cohoma had grown
so hylaea-wise by now, however, that neither hunter
attempted to fool them into believing they had reached
a higher level.

Up they mounted, through the Second Level, where
the sunlight was brilliant yellow-green, where it struck
most vegetation directly and not with the aid of mir-
ror vines. Where the day was bright enough to resemble
the floor of a north temperate evergreen forest on
Moth or Terra. Logan and Cohoma expanded, while
Born and Losting grew steadily more cautious.

Then they were in the First Level itself, climbing
amid a profusion of riotously colored flowers, etched
and engraved and painted by a nature delirious with
her own beauty. Logan knew that any of the botanists
restricted to the station and to studying specimens
recovered by the skimmer teams would give an arm to
be here with them now. Company policy forbade it,
given the inimical nature of this world. Botanists were
expensive.

All the basic shadings and hues merged together
with more exotic coloration. Logan passed a maroon
bloom half a meter across, its pigment so intense it
was nearly purple in places. The petals were striped
with aquamarine blue, and it rested on a bed of
metallic gold leaves.

Nor was drunken variation limited only to color.
Or'e blossom boasted petals which grew in interlock-
ing, multiple spirals of pink and turquoise and almond.
Cohoma promptly dubbed it the clown plant. There

152

were flowers that grew like a phalanx of pikes, green
flowers springing from green stems, and green branches
that sprouted green grapes. There were flowers inside
flowers, flowers the color of smoky quartz, flowers with
transparent petals that tasted of caramel.

And these were matched in glitter and evolutionary
exhuberance by a swarming multitude of nonvegetable
life, which crawled, hopped, glided, buzzed, and
swung about like animated dreams before the spell-
bound gaze of the two skimmer pilots. Born was
right—they were smaller and they moved faster, some
darting across their pathway too rapidly to be seen
as other then a blur.

Hunters and gatherers here would have to work
four times as hard to gather the same amount of
food. There was greater natural competition here and,
according to the hunters, greater danger as well. Which
explained why the survivors of the trapped colony ship
had chosen to forego this aerial paradise for the less
competitive regions of the Third and Fourth Levels.
Having observed the thunderous nightly storms from
the comparative safety of the station, Logan assumed
the protection the depths offered from violent weather
was another factor in the decision to descend.

The noise might have been still another factor. It
was deafening here. Much of it seemed to emanate
from huge colonies of little six-legged creatures about
the size of a man's thigh. About half-a-meter long, they
were slimly built and moved rapidly through the thin-
ner branches with six-clawed legs. Hard-shelled limbs
joined to a furry cylindrical body, one end of which
tapered into a long, whiplike tail, the other ending in
a snout like an aardvark's. The familiar triple oculars
were set back of this, and behind them rose a single,
flexible ridge of flesh, which appeared to be a sound
sensor.

They were the mockingbirds of this world, the hex-
apodal kookaburras, uttering everything from a high-
pitched whistle to a tenor cackle. Tribes of them ac-
companied the party as it made its way through the
vinepaths, offering unintelligible insults and sugges-
tions. Occasionally one of the furcots would snarl men-
acingly at them and they would scatter, only to reap-

153

pear when communal courage grew strong enough,
to berate and admonish once again. Only boredom
drove them off.

Yet another reason for living lower down offered it-
self. Even here, many dozens of meters below the
crowns of the trees, the branches and cubbies were
thinner, less roadlike. Vines and lianas and creepers
thinned in proportion. More often than they liked,
Logan and Cohoma found themselves using their arms
instead of their legs to move from one place to the
next. When Bom asked if they were tiring and wished
to drop to more easily negotiable paths, both gritted
their teeth, wiped the sweat clear from eyes and
forehead, and shook their heads. Better to expend all
one's reserves here than risk passing below the sta-
tion.

They continued on that way, now and then dipping
downward when the forest top thinned too much for
Bern's comfort, rising again where the hylaea bulged
into the sky.

It rained early that night. For the first time since
their skimmer had crashed, both giants were subjected
to a thorough drenching before the two hunters could
erect suitable shelter. Without hundreds of meters of
intervening foliage to protect them, they caught the
full force of the nightly downpour. The volume and
fury they had anticipated from having observed similar
storms from inside the station. It was the noise that
was surprising—the station was effectively sound-
proofed against it. They had descended a good thirty
meters more in hopes of securing a little protection.
Even here the forest shook and rattled. Real, steady
wind up here, not the lost, dallying zephyr they had
encountered at the Home's level.

There was no soundproofing to shut out the lightning
and thunder, which rattled their brains in counterpoint
to the flogging rain. Logan sneezed, reflected miserably
that the first colonists here could have perished from
pneumonia had they not chosen to live at more shel-
tered depths. It was only a momentary chill—the
humidity and constant warmth made it hard to catch
the serious cold she feared. But when the sun rose
154

steamily bright the following morning, both pilots re-
mained soaked to the skin.

Under the concerned directions of Born—and Lost-
ing's more taciturn comments—they underwent a re-
education in the following days. This world nearer
the sky was as deadly as Born had indicated; only
here the methodology of murder was matched in dead-
liness by the subtlety of execution. Without the ad-
vice and protection of Born, Losting, and the furcots,
both giants would have been dead within a day.

The danger which remained sharpest in Logan's
mind was a brilliant yellow fruit. Hourglass-shaped
and about the size of a pear, its blossoms exuded a fra-
grance redolent of spring honeysuckle. The epiphytic
bush was top-heavy with this fruit. Born pointed out
how tokkers and other fruit-eaters assiduously avoided
it.

"Bitter taste?" Cohoma asked.

Bom shook his head. "No, the taste is wondrous,
and the pulp nourishing and rejuvenating to a tired
wanderer. The danger is in separating the fruit from
the seeds within."

"That's a problem with most fruit," the pilot ob-
served.

"It is a particular problem with the greeter fruit,"
Bom told him, as he reached up and casually plucked
one free. After staring silently at the plant for a long
minute, Logan noted—emfoling again. "No animal of
the world has been able to solve the problem," the
hunter continued, turning the attractive, harmless-
looking fnut over and over in his hand. "Only the peo-
ple."

He hunted around until he found a long, thin, dead
branch growing from a nearby bush. Breaking it off
cleanly, he sharpened one end with his knife. Then
he slid the point into the fruit, taking care not to
pierce the center. Laying the impaled fruit on a branch,
he used the knife to make a multiple incision on the
side away from the stick. Then he lifted the branch
high overhead and began tapping the incised area
firmly against the protruding knob of a small cubble.

On the sixth tap there was a bang of such unex-
pected volume that Logan and Cohoma ducked. There
155

was a violent snarl from their left. Ruumahum stuck his
head out from a clump of wire bushes. Seeing that
no one was injured, he uttered a snort of derision at
such foolish goings-on and vanished once more.

Bom drew the stick downward, showed it to the
giants. The whole left side of the fruit, where the
incisions had been made, bad been blown away as
though there had been a small bomb within it, which
was exactly the case.

"This is how the greeter spreads its seed," Bom
explained needlessly. Peeling off sections of the re-
maining undamaged fruit, he extended them to Co-
homa and Logan. Logan slipped it hesitantly between
her lips, the recent demonstration having dampened
her appetite somewhat. As soon as her taste buds
made contact with it, she sucked in the whole piece and
rolled it around in her mouth, squeezing the juices
free. It was exquisite, sugary, yet tart, like grenadine

and lemon.

"What finally happens to the seeds?" she asked,
when the last drop was drained, the final scrap of

pulp swallowed.

By way of reply Bom directed them upward and
to the left of the parasitic bush. Bom studied the
trunk of the tree nearby, finally pointed. The pilots
stared close. Arranged in a tiny, neat spray pattern on
the trunk were a dozen small holes, penetrating the.
solid wood for several centimeters. At the bottom of
each hole they could barely make out a tiny, dark seed.
Six spines protruded from each. Each seed was per-
haps a half-centimeter in diameter, including spines.

With his knife, Bom dug one of them out. Logan
reached to touch it, and Bom had to block her hand-
had she learned nothing of the world these past many
seven-days? She and Cohoma studied the minute seed
with interest. Closer inspection revealed that the edges
of the six spines were razor-sharp and lined with mi-
croscopic, backward-facing barbs.

"I see," Cohoma murmured. "The seeds germinate in
the trees. But how do they get spread? Does the fruit
dry up to the point where internal pressure sends them

flying?"

"Can't, be, Jan," Logan objected. "If the fruit dries

156

out, where's the source of this kind of pressure? No,
it has to be-"

Born shook his head. "The greeter does not root in
a plant. When an animal which is old or ill has lost
its judgment, hunger may drive it to eat a greeter." He
resumed the march.

Logan paused long enough for another glance at the
little spray pattern where the seeds had bored holes
in the thick hardwood, then followed the hunter.

"An animal tries to eat one of the fruits, bites
through the pulp until it punctures the inner sac and
gets the whole barrage right in its face," Cohoma
theorized grimly. "H it's lucky the seeds kill it out-
right. Otherwise it probably bleeds to death. Mean-
while the corpse serves as a ready-made reservoir
of nutrients."

"Jan, the plants have struck an even balance on
this world. No, I take that back. They have the upper
edge. The animals are outnumbered, outsized, and
outgunned. I wondered how Bern's ancestors could
have lost so much technology so fast. I don't wonder
any more. How can you fight a forest?"

The discovery came days later, announced in the
usual phlegmatic fashion of the furcots. "Panta,"
Ruumahum called back to them. Both furcots were
sitting at the end of a long, relatively clear cubble.

Bern's spirits rose. "A Panta is a large open space,
a depression in the world. Of course," he added
hurriedly, seeing the look on the giants' faces, "it might
be a natural Panta. There are half a dozen within
two days' walk of the Home." He turned back to
Ruumahum.

"How big?"

"Big," the furcot replied softly. "And in the middle,
thing of axe metal like sky-boat." Triple eyes stared
suddenly at Logan.

Without knowing why, she looked away, concen-
trating instead on Born. "The station! It's got to be!"

"It is done, then. Quickly." He turned to jog down
the cubble.

This time it was Logan who put out the restrain-
ing hand. "Not too quickly, Born. There are mecha-
nisms—like our compass—which protect the station

from marauding forest-dwellers and sky-demons. No
creature of the hylaea world can reach it."

"Silverslith?" asked Losting with uncertainty.

"No, Losting, not even a silverslith."

The hunter persisted. "Has your station-Home ever

been attacked by a silverslith?"

Logan had to admit it had not, but she was ada-
mant in insisting that even that gigantic animal could
not stand up to a gimbaled laser or explosive shell.
Both hunters were forced to confess they had no idea
what these magical weapons were. Cohoma assured
them with a barely supressed smile that they were more

toxic than jacari thorns.

"Then the demons of your own worlds must be
far, far greater than even those of Hell," Born sur-
mised, "for you to need such weapons."

"They are," she admitted, without bothering to ex-
plain that the demons in question were two-legged.
Besides, now that they were within hailing distance
of the station, there was an experiment she had been
waiting all this time to try. She looked straight at
Ruumahum. "All right," she said in a commanding
tone, "take us to the Panta, Ruumahum."

The furcot eyed her strangely for a moment, then
tamed and trotted into the greenery ahead. Born said
nothing. Perhaps in his mind the event held no sig-
nificance. But it indicated to Logan and Cohoma that
the furcots would respond to the commands of hu-
mans other than those of Bom's tribe. That could be
most important in smoothing certain things over.

A few more lianas, some two-meter-tall leaves,
and a couple of branches eased aside—and they were
standing on the fringe of what looked like a vast
green circle paved with green, beige, and brown.

The floor of the Panta was composed of the tops
of hundreds, thousands of trees, cubbies, and epiphytes
which had been sheared off to provide the station
with a protective "moat" of open space devoid of
concealment. In the center of the green-walled amphi-
theater the station itself rose on the cut-off crowns of
three Pillar trees grown close together. They supported
the whole weight of the station. The structure itself
consisted of a single vast metal building with a sloping,
158

domed top. A large blister of transparent acrylics
emerged from the apex. A wide porch, protected by
a waist-high mesh fence, encircled the entire structure.
At each point of the compass, a covered catwalk ex-
tended from the central edifice, terminating in a bubble
of duralloy and plastic. The narrow, blunt end of a
laser cannon projected from each of these turrets.

The independently mounted cannons could swivel
so that three could be brought to bear on any one
point as near as twenty meters to the station. Any im-
partial observer surveying this awesome array of fire-
power might have calculated that the modest explor-
atory outpost was expecting an invasion in force from
the surrounding forest. Actually, they were also there
to protect against assaults from other than local pred-
ators.

The "sky-demons" the founders of the station were
really worried about would attack at high speed,
backed by intelligence, and armed with writs, ordain-
ments, ordinances, and regulations. These last-named
were more to be feared than the teeth of roving
carnivores.

Halfway between the bottom of the station and the
top of the cut-off forest, a series of interlocking struts
laced with thick cable mesh surrounded each Pillar-
tree trunk. A steady electric current Bowed through
those cables, sufficient to discourage any curious meat-
eater, which might somehow have evaded starlit eyes
and electronic surveillance systems.

That explained. Born inquired as to the purpose of
the flat disk of metal set off to their right. A fifth
catwalk, slightly larger than the others, extended
from it to the station. A smaller-topped tree was suf-
ficient to support this lesser weight.

Born did not recognize the oblong shape resting on
the platform as a larger cousin of the giants' skim-
mer. The shuttlecraft differed sufficiently in shape to
remain unidentifiable to both hunters, as did the web
of grids and antennae which projected from the sta-
tion's sides and from the observation dome at its top.

Behind the gimbaled gun placements and metal
catwalks, behind the encircling double-meshed fence
and walkway, lay living quarters, laboratories, admin-

159




istrative offices, quartermaster's stockrooms, a com-
munications center that would be the envy of any
operator on a planet with a million-plus population,
skimmer hangar and service bays, solar energy con-
centrator and power plant, plus a host of peripheral
chambers, alcoves, and rooms. Even a casual traveler,
with minimal outplanet experience, instantly would
have recognized the extraordinary expense that had
gone into the construction of this first station.

"Here goes," said Logan.

In theory everything had been thoroughly pretested,
and nothing in the way of automatic weaponry would
vaporize her before a thorough check on body and type
was run. In theory. She had never had the chance
to verify it personally. She had it now.

There was a half-cut cubble leading in the general
direction of the station. She stepped out of the green
wall and into the open. Two stubby nozzles immedi-
ately swung around to cover her. She hoped whoever
was on shift at the computer board was not sleepy,
doped up, or just itchy for a little target practice.
Nothing happened for long moments. She waved, made
flapping motions. Cohoma waited expectantly, while
Born and Losting kept wary eyes on the open sky and
fingered their snufflers.

Other thoughts fought for attention in Bom's mind.
The half-dream of the giants station-Home was real.
It existed, sat solidly before him. Whether it held all
the wonders promised remained to be seen. For now,
while exposed to all manner of sky-demons, they would
put their trust in the efficacy of jacari poison and

not promises.

Figures could be seen moving rapidly and care-
fully toward them. As they neared, Logan looked down
at her feet, then up, and saw that a path—doubtlessly
one of many—had been traced out across the forest
top. She had been briefed about the existence of such
pathways but had not committed them to memory,
since she never expected to have to use one.

The figures carried handguns and were clad in the
same kind of gray jumpsuits Born had first seen on
Cohoma and Logan. As they drew nearer their eyes
grew wide. There were three of them. The one in the
160

lead pulled up before Logan, looked her slowly up
and down. His expression was half hysteria, half as-
tonishment.

"Kimi Logan! I'll be damned!" He shook his head
slowly. "We lost all contact with your skimmer weeks
ago. Sent out scouts and didn't find a thing. You missed
a nice burial ceremony."

"Sorry, Sal."

"Where the hell did you come from?"

"I couldn't have put it better myself, Sal." She
tamed and called back into the brush. "All clear,
come on out, everybody."

Cohoma stepped clear of the treetops. At the ap-
pearance of Born and Losting, the man with the gray
sideburns and cleft chin temporarily ran out of ex-
pletives. "I'll be double-damned," he muttered finally.

After a glance from Logan he bolstered the hand-
gun. His gaze went back to the two hunters. Born
fought down the urge to fidget nervously under the
evaluating stare. Besides, he was occupied studying
the three new giants. The biggest one, the one Kimi-
logan called Sal, was no different from Cohoma,
though slightly taller and heavier. The other two giants
were Logan's size, though only one was female.

"Pygmies, no less!" He eyed Logan inquisitively.

"Natives." She smiled back at him. "Too many
similarities for parallel evolution. We can't be posi-
tive, of course, until they've been given a thorough
run-through in Medical, but except for a few minor dif-
ferences I'll bet they test out as human as you or I.
Jan and I figure they're the remnants of a century's-
lost colony ship. Maybe even pre-Commonwealth.
Incidentally, they speak excellent, if sibilant, Ter-
ranglo."

Sal continued to stare in wonderment at Born and
Losting. "Sounds right. There were enough of those
first colonizers who ended up in the wrong place. Might
not have met the thranx for another millennium if
it hadn't been for a lost ship." He grunted. "Minor
differences . . . you mean those toes and their size?"

Logan nodded. "That and their acquired protective
coloration. Look, Jaa and I have been going through
that theoretical hell you just mentioned. I've spent

161

weeks programming the kitchen in my head to turn
out everything from steak to afterdinner mints. And I
haven't had a real bath since we left."

"And some decent clothes," Cohoma added fer-
vently. "Oh Lord, for clean underwear!"

"Hansen will be glad to see you both back," Sal
smiled. "I wish I could see the old man's expression
when you walk in with your two friends, though. Price-
less!"

"You ought to see him when we tell him some of
the discoveries we've made. You ought to get out and
walk around, Sal. It's the only way to learn about a
world."

"Yeah? If you don't mind, I'll leave the hiking
and grubbing to you two enthusiasts." Cohoma took a
playful swing at him. "Tell me about 'em?"

"Sorry, Sal." Cohoma grinned. "Province of the dis-
coverers, you know."

"Oh Churchfire, Jan, I wouldn't try to mad any of
your bonus money. How could I prove any of it,
anyway? But it's good to hear you had a profitable
little walk. The old man's been under some heavy
pressure from the home office, story has it, ever since
Tsing-ahn killed himself."

Cohoma and Logan weren't too tired to be shocked.
"Popi killed himself?" Logan whispered, using the
biochemist's nickname.

"That's the chat they're handing out. Nearchose—
you know, the security whale who was a friend of the
profs—was the last one to see him alive. Report from
Nick was that the guy was depressed about some-
thing, but hardly suicidal. Went vibrato and blew up
everything in his lab. 'Course, when a guy gets as
dependent on the silly stuff as Tsing-ahn was, you can't
tell what he's liable to do. Company assumes a cal-
culated risk hiring guys like that. This time it didn't
pay out."

"Too bad, I liked the little joe," Cohoma muttered.

"Everybody did."

An awkward silence followed, each absorbed in his
own thoughts and fully aware that he or she was on
this world because of some serious weakness of their
own—money, drugs, or something best not mentioned.
162

Whenever the subject surfaced, it was quickly
dropped. Discussion of such things was avoided by
mutual consent.

They walked in silence halfway to the station when
the something that seemed to be missing finally sur-
faced in Logan's mind. She looked behind them, then
over at Bom. "Where are Ruumahum and Geeliwan?"

"Both said they would feel uncomfortable away
from the forest," Bom replied truthfully. "They do not
like open space. You didn't say you wanted them to
come with us."

"Well, it's not important." She stared longingly back
toward the emerald, flower-speckled rampart. To
parade the pair of omnivorous hexapods like a couple
of lap dogs before the excitable Hansen was a pleasure
she had been looking forward to. But she was halfway
to that bath and steak, and she was not going back
into the jungle now. That could wait.

Omnivorous—she had assumed the furcots were
omnivorous. Come to think of it, she had never seen
either of them eat anything. Oh well, as Born said,
they felt uncomfortable in certain situations. Probably
they liked to eat in private as well as make love
away from prying eyes. Still, it seemed odd she had
never seen either of them take a bite out of anything.

Further speculation was interrupted by a cry from
Bom. He spotted the demon first. "Losting! 'Ware
zenith!" Again she felt that shock at words which
didn't seem to fit Bom's way of life.

Losting looked overhead, reaching simultaneously
for his snuffler. Then she saw the tiny brown spot cir-
cling far above. There were many such spots, always
clear of the station. Apparently, Bom had somehow
detected belligerent motion in this one. He was right.
The spot became a recognizable shape, one she had
hoped never to see at close range again. Broad wings,
clawed feet, long jaw armed with razor-sharp teeth.

She could not entirely repress a faint smile of
superiority as she noticed them hurriedly going for
their primitive airguns. "Don't worry, Bom, Losting.
Relax and watch." Bom eyed her questioningly, but

managed to force down his natural inclination to
load and set.

Logan studied the diving demon. It drew nearer in
a tightening spiral, mouth agape.

She could not see which of the weapons on the
perimeter had turned to cover that particular section
of sky until the red beam lanced out and up from one
of the gimbaled turrets. The sky-demon disintegrated
in a brief flare of carbonized flesh and powdered bone.

Bom and Losting stared quietly at the sky where
the demon had been plummeting toward them only
seconds before. Equally silent, Logan watched them.
So did Cohoma and Sal and the other two.

"It's something like a very advanced kind of snuf-
fler, Bom," she explained finally. "How to make
you see ... Well, it uses a kind of light to kill with."

Bom turned and pointed to the spherical turret
which housed the cannon. "In there?"

"That's right," said Cohoma. "There are others
placed around the station. With them and the electrical
shielding on the supporting trunks, we're quite safe

here."

"Remember, Bom," Logan told him excitedly, as
they resumed the walk to the station, "how your
people arrayed themselves to meet the Akadi? A
system of weapons like that one," and she indicated
the motionless turret, "could be set up around your
village to protect the Home. You'd never have to
worry about the Akadi or silversliths or anything else

again."

"Have to fire very fast, and move it quickly at
such close distance," Losting commented.

"Oh, that's no problem," a self-assured Cohoma ex-
plained. "Once you've cleared a space around the
Home like we have here and set up a decent detector
system, a predator couldn't even get close without
being spotted."

"Clear space?"

"Yes, you know, cut away the close-in vegetation
like I originally proposed to stop the Akadi. Just leave
a few cubbies or vines to serve as a kind of draw-
bridge. It would be easy. We can give you tools similar
to these light weapons, which would make the cutting
a simple job. You could obtain them for the asking,
and for helping us find our way around your world
164

and locate certain substances, you'd earn the goodwill
credits in no time."

"Cut away," Bom murmured. "Clear space."

"Yes, Bom." Logan looked puzzled. "Is something
the matter? Can't you just emfol first and then—?"

"Nothing's the matter." The hunter's expression
brightened. "So many wonders all at once. I'm a little
overwhelmed. I would like very much to learn more
about such things as light weapons and defensive sys-
tems and what we must do to get them."

"The details of the last part aren't for us to decide,
Bom. We're only minor employees of a great con-
cern, of the people who established this station here.
A man named Hansen will decide those particulars.
You'll meet him soon. But I don't see any trouble work-
ing out an arrangement that will be advantageous to
both our peoples. Especially after what you've already
done for Jan and me."

There was a lift waiting for them. It took them
through a gate in the underside of the charged grid and
up into the lower floor of the station. As they passed the
grid, the ever curious Bom asked again about the prin--
ciple behind it. Cohoma had a hard time making him
understand, but references to lightning seemed to sat-
isfy both hunters.

The lift pulled Bom and Losting into a world of
new wonders. First among them was the sudden, al-
most physical shock of color change. The all-pervasive
green, necked with bright colors and every shade of
brown, was abruptly replaced by a stiff, straight-
angled world of silver and gray, white and blue. The
only touch of green in this section of corridor was
provided by a row of parasitic bushes growing in a
long deep planter, which served as a divider between
sections of corridor.

Bom saw that the chaga was not well. The flowers
were big and colorful, but the leaves were not straight
and were not reaching for the sun the way they should
be. He had time for only a quick glance. There were
too many new things here to see and try to under-
stand. More giants, engaged in various inexplicable
tasks, hurrying on alien errands, filled the corridor.
165

Some were clad in garb even stranger than the gray
suits worn by Logan, Cohoma, and Sal.

A man saw them, came over to speak in a whisper
to the one called Sal. Born heard him clearly. "Hansen
wants to see the two natives immediately. He's up in
his office." He looked over at Logan and Cohoma.
"You two also."

Logan groaned. "Can't we at least get cleaned up
a little first? Andre, what we've been through, these
past months—!"

"I know. You also know Hansen. Orders." He
shrugged helplessly.

"Hell, let's get it over with," Cohoma grunted.
"This Hansen person," Born asked as they walked
toward an interior lift, "he is chief of your tribe?"

"Not chief. Born, and not tribe," Logan explained
with a hint of irritation, which was caused by the or-
der, not Bom's question. "This station houses people
who are engaged in similar hunts. But it's not the
same kind of organization as you have in the Home.
You might regard the people in this station as a hunt-
ing party, with Mr. Hansen the leader. That's the best
I can do. I'm not sure I could explain what a corpora-
tion is if I had a month."

"It is enough," Born replied as they turned a corner
and started down a white, brightly decorated tunnel.
"He is the one we must ask for light guns and other
wonders for our people."

"You understand, Born. I knew you would," she de-
clared cheerfully. "Help us in exploring your world
and finding a few things you don't use yourselves,
and wonders will be granted gladly in return. It's
an old principle among my people. Among your own
ancestors." And just a touch illegal in this one instance,
that's all, she thought, but did not say to him.

"What sort of man is your hunting party leader?"
"That depends on where you're coming from,"
Logan told him enigmatically. She seemed ready to
explain further, but they had reached a door, and
Sal beckoned them to be silent. He held it open for
them and then remained behind while the other four
entered.

Hansen sat behind a narrow, curved desk which he

166

managed to give the appearance of wearing, like an
enormous plastic belt. The desk was piled high with
tape spools, cassettes, reams of paper, and dozens of
separate reports bound in simulated leather binders.
The walls were given over to shelves lined with books
and tape holders. The rear of the room was filled by
a floor-to-ceiling window which offered a panorama
of the Panta and the suffocating forest beyond.

As they entered, Hansen was staring at the screen
of a tape viewer mounted on a flexible arm. "Just
a moment, please. Jan, Kimi, good to find you alive."

He spoke without turning, his voice mellow, reassur-
ing.

His stature enhanced his middle-aged pudginess. He
was not much taller than Bom. Hair started halfway
back on a forehead that seemed to be made from
dark putty and fell to his shoulders in long waves. Save
for the thick brush mustache which clung to his up-
per lip like a hibernating insect, his hair had turned
completely gray.

He was sweating despite the air-conditioning. In-
deed, that was the first thing Bom had noticed upon
entering the station—an apparently deliberate, abnor-
mal chill. Even on cool nights in the world, it rarely
got this cold.

Neither hunter minded the extended wait. They
were fully occupied with studying the room and its
contents. Bom did not miss, however, the respectful
silence with which the tired, impatient Logan and
Cohoma waited.

Hansen touched a switch on the side of the viewer,
then pushed it back and away on its arm. It locked
into place out of his way as he turned to eye his
visitors. His right arm rested on an arm of the chair
and he rubbed at his perspiring forehead with the
other. He looked tired, and he was. Running this
station had prematurely aged as experienced and
toughened an old hand as Hansen. If it was not
something breaking down that he could not get re-
placements for because of the risk of a supply ship
running afoul of a Church or Commonwealth warship,
it was some nonmechanical crisis. It seemed like ev-
ery time one of his people put a foot on this world
167

they were promptly stung, bitten, punctured, nibbled
at, or otherwise set upon by the local flora and

fauna.

Nor had he recovered from the loss of the life-
prolonging burl extracts, the burl itself, and Tsing-
ahn, the man who knew most about them. If only
that poor madman had not been so thorough in the
destruction of his notes and records! The news of
the biochemist's suicide and concurrent destruction of
everything relating to what had come to be called
the immortality extract had not gone over well with
Hansen's superiors—not gone over well at all.

He did manage a slight grin as he examined the
two returned members of the skimmer team. The
mental lift provided by their miraculous survival had
come at a badly needed time.

"We'd given you up for sure, for sure," he told
them. "Couldn't believe my ears when Security re-
ported four people standing at the edge of the forest."
A comer of his mouth twitched at the remem-
brance. "You two've caused me no end of trouble,
you know. Now I've got to re-call all the paperwork
detailing your deaths, the requests for replacements,
everything. Somebody in Budgeting's not going to like
you two."

"Sorry, Chief," Logan said, smiling back.
"Now," Hansen puffed expansively, leaning back
slightly in the chair and folding his hands over his
slight paunch, "tell me about your aboriginal acquaint-
ances, here."                '

"They saved our lives," she replied, matter-of-factly,
"and I doubt they're aborigines, sir. Near as we can
figure, they're the descendants of the populace of a
colony ship that lost its way and wound up here.
They've lost the memory of that origin, all Common-
wealth and pre-Commonwealth knowledge, and nearly
all their technology. They have developed a rudimen-
tary tribal social structure. As a result, our friends
Born and Losting are convinced that they are in truth
natives of this world."

"And you're pretty certain they're not."
"That's right, sir," Cohoma chipped in. "Too many
similarities, an axe made of ship alloy, other things.

Same language, although they've developed a dialect
all their own, family structure is—"

"Yes, yes," Hansen cut him off with a casual wave.
"Saved your lives too, did they? And brought you all
the way back through that rooted Hades out there-
how far did you say you'd come?" He cocked a quer-
ulous eye at Logan. She named a figure and the chief
of station whistled. "Just the four of you then, that
many kilometers through that?" He gestured over his
shoulder toward the window.

"Yes, sir—and a couple of very domesticated ani-
mals."

"It was a very gutsy thing for them to try, sir,"
Cohoma added. "Up until this trek none of their tribe
had been more than a couple of kilometers from their
home village."

"All of which is most gratifying—and utterly im-
plausible. How the Churchwarden did you survive?"

"Sometimes I wonder myself," Logan responded.
"Chief, could I sit down, please. I'm a little worn."

Hansen shook his head dolefully. "I forget prior-
ities. Excuse me, Kimi." He called and Sal appeared
at the door. "Salomon, bring in some chairs for every-
one."

The chairs were brought. Born and Losting imitated,
rather hesitantly, the sitting motions of their two giant
companions.

"We pulled it off with a combination of good luck
and the skill of these two." She indicated the hunters.
"Born and his folk know their forest world. They
live with it. in the truest sense. Their village is set
in a single tree. The adaptations on both sides exceed
anything I've ever heard of. Frankly," she said cast-
ing a speculative glance at Born, "I think the tree
gets the best of the setup. Bom's people would dis-
agree, of course."

Bom felt no anger at her words. There was no
shame in being considered inferior to one's Home.
Even after many seven-days in the forest, many long
hours of patient explanation, it seemed that the giants
still did not understand. From what he had overheard
in this station-Home thus far, he doubted they ever
would. The casualness with which "cutting" and mak-
169

ing "clear space" were mentioned had left him with a
lingering numbness. He returned his attention to the
graybeard.

"It seems that some kind of reward is in order.
Something beyond our deeply felt thanks, Mr. . . .
uh. Born." He smiled in a fatherly way. "Tell me,
Born, Losting, what would you like?"

Bom looked across at his companion. The bigger
hunter squirmed uncomfortably in his chair and
mumbled, "The sooner we leave this cold, hard place
for the Home, the better I will like it."

Bom nodded and turned back to Hansen. "I too
would like to leave. But first I would like to know
more about the light weapons and electrical vines and
such things."

Hansen leaned forward, studied the unblinking
hunter. "An aborigine you're not, Born. Oh, it's just
as well. The less primitive you've become, the simpler
it will make negotiations. As to advanced weapons
systems, well, we'll have to think about that a little, I
believe. You'll get them when we've worked out some
mutual assistance agreements even a priest couldn't
break in Commonwealth court."

"They can be very helpful, sir," Cohoma put in.
"We've lost so many people in the forest that—"

"I'm aware of that, Jan." Hansen dismissed the
others from his mind to concentrate fully on Bom.
"What this is called. Born, is an initial survey out-
post. It's the first home for my people on this world.
It's been established at great expense and with much
secrecy because there's so much at stake here. Do
you retain knowledge of what a mine is, Bom, a
mill, a processing plant?" Bom remained blank-faced,
his expression unchanged.

"No, I can see you don't. Let me try to explain.
There are many things we can make, like the material
for this station and the acrylic of this desk. There
are many we cannot. This world, insofar as we've
been able to determine, appears to be a storehouse
of such valuable things. Obtaining these substances
can make—let's see—can make a better life for all,
my people as well as yours. Your help in developing
all this would make things much simpler for us." He
170

took a deep breath. "In particular, there is one sub-
stance we've discovered which can—"

"Excuse me, sir." The interruption came from the
man named Sal, who had remained with them. "Do
you think it's-?"

Hansen made a quieting gesture. "Our friend Bom
isn't going to return to his tree and get on the deep
space tridee to report to the nearest Commonwealth
peaceforcer. Besides," he continued, looking back at
Bom, "I believe in being straightforward. I want our
new friends to understand the importance of all this.

"There is a drug, Bom, which can be derived from
the heart of a certain burl." Bom looked blank. "A
burl is a woody growth that forms on a tree to con-
tain the spread of a foreign infection or parasitic in-
festation. The burl forms around this foreign material.
When the pulp at the center of this particular burl
is removed and properly treated, a liquid is produced
which appears to have the ability of prolonging hu-
man life-span tremendously. How about you, Bom?
Wouldn't you like to live twice as long?"

"I do not know," Bom replied honestly. "To what
end?"

"What end indeed?" Hansen murmured. "Well!" He
rose and slapped both palms hard on the smooth desk.
"Enough philosophy for now. Would you like to see
some more of the station?"

"I'd like that very much."

Losting merely grunted his indifference.

"You two," Hansen said to Logan and Cohoma, "go
back to your quarters. They've been cleared, but I'll
see that your personal effects are returned immedi-
ately. You've got twenty-four hours off-duty and blank
credit at the commissary and cafeteria. Tell Sergeant
Binder you've got an open key for your next three
meals—order anything you want."

"Thank you, sir," they chorused together.

Hansen nodded toward the dense forest encircling
the station. "Don't thank me till you're out there
again, trying to figure out what's eating your leg off
at the ankle and how to kill it. I'll take charge of
your friends." He came around the desk, gave Logan's

171

shoulder a friendly squeeze. "You've got a full shift
to enjoy yourselves and a second to relax. After that,
if Medical checks you out okay, I expect you to req-
uisition a new skimmer and be back on the job."

XII

As they traveled through the place of wonders Bom
noted that all the other giants deferred to the Hansen
person as one would to chief Sand or Joyla. From
this he inferred that Logan's description of him as a
hunting team leader considerably understated his au-
thority.

Hansen showed them the living quarters inhabited
by the station's staff, the communications equipment
up in the polyplexalloy dome, which kept the station
in contact with the swarm of skimmers that scoured
the forest world, and the receiving hangar which the
skimmers returned to to disgorge their cargoes of maps,
reports, and new alien material.

"What of the skimmer out there?" Bom asked,
pointing through a thick window to the shuttlecraft
platform. "Why is it so different in shape and so
much bigger?"

"That's not a skimmer, Bom," Hansen explained.
"That's a shuttlecraft, for traveling from here to our
supply ships out in space—a place above your Up-
per Hell. The big supply ships which visit individual
worlds can only travel in nothingness."

"How can one travel in nothing?"

"By making a little artificial world out of metal-
like this station—and taking food, water, and air with
it."

The two hunters stoically partook of the marvels of
the cafeteria, where local proteins were combined

172

with colors and flavors and then altered to produce
food more familiar to the giants.

Bom's interest perked up at this explanation. "I
understand, now. What kind of local foods do you use
to make yours?"

"Oh, whatever's available. The instrumentation is
very versatile. We send out a scoop-equipped skim-
mer, and it brings back the requisite number of kilos
of raw material—vegetable and animal."

"Could I see where this wonder happens?"

"Sure."

He took them through the cafeteria to the processing
room, showed them the hopper where plants and ani-
mals gathered from the forest were reprocessed with
expensive offplanet nutrients, vitamins, and flavorings.

Bom studied the bales of shrubs and bushes. The
majority were herbaceous succulents, the woody ma-
terial removed and discarded as scrap. None of those
gathered were decayed, none were blighted or dying.
These giants did not emfol—they took what they
needed, efficiently, easily, blindly. His face remained
an enthusiastic mask, despite his thoughts.

They moved on to the recreation chamber, where
even Losting was awed by the marvels devoted to
idle amusement. Eventually, after this extended tour
calculated to impress, Hansen conducted them to the
laboratories where research on the fruits of many
skimmer trips took place.

Bom and Losting were introduced to earnest teams
of preoccupied men and women engaged in intense,
incomprehensible tasks.

"McKay!" Hansen called to a tall, thin woman
dressed in a dark lab frock, hair tied in a thick bun.

"Hello, Chief." Her voice was low, her black eyes
piercing. She examined the two hunters. "Interesting
—something local that is exactly what it appears to
be, for a change."

"This is Bom and Losting, great hunters. Gentle-
men, Gam McKay, one of our very best—what was
your word, Bom?—shaman, yes shaman."

"I heard Jan and Kind made it back. With the help
of these two?"

"You'll see the whole report as soon as they get
173

around to making it out," Hansen declared. "Right
now I'd appreciate it if you'd show our friends what
you and Yazid got out of that conch bulb."

She nodded and they followed her down a narrow
walkway between benches stacked high with glittering,
light-catching devices, until they reached the end of
a table. To one side lay three large crates made of
a transparent material like the station windows. These
were filled with the branches of the chaga. The bushes
from which the branches had been taken. Born noted,
had been in full bloom. Each branch was heavy with
red-bordered, white-throated flowers, now beginning to
wilt noticeably.

The woman McKay opened a small cabinet and
carefully removed a tiny clear vial. "This is the distilled
extract of about two thousand blooms." She unscrewed
the tiny cap and offered it to Hansen. With a smile,
he declined. "Born, how about you?" She extended
the vial toward him and instructed him to sniff at the
open top. Born did so. The scent that rose from the
vial was that of the chaga, but intensified many, many
times. He reeled slightly, but his expression did not
change.

"I am familiar with it," he told them. McKay looked
disappointed and turned to Hansen for encourage-
ment.

"Familiar—is that all he can say?"

"Remember, Gam, Bom lives among such aromatic
blossoms, hunts among them daily." The chemist con-
tinued mumbling to herself as she locked the vial back
in the cabinet.

"Why is this done?" Bom asked Hansen as they
left for the next lab.

"Properly thinned and blended with other enhanc-
ing and stabilizing chemicals, Bom, the little container
will serve as a base for a brand new fragrance—what
we call perfume. It will be worth a great deal of . . ."
Once more he tried to explain that awkward concept.

"I still do not understand. What can such a thing
be used for?"

"Women will use it, Bom, to make themselves more
attractive, to make themselves seem more beautiful."

"They clothe themselves in the odor of death."

"Isn't that putting it a little strongly, Bom?" Hansen
wondered, taken aback by the grimness of the hunter's
comment. He was trying to Sympathize with the
hunter's natural lack of understanding. However, his
explanation seemed to do little to improve Bom's un-
derstanding.

Bom was trying to see, he honestly was. So was
Losting. But the further they went through this house
of strangeness, the more they saw of its purpose and
intents, the harder understanding became. For ex-
ample, there were the three crates filled with mutilated
chaga. The branches had been taken unemfoled from
the mature parent plants. Thousands more would be
similarly torn to make a little concentrated chaga smell.
For what? To heal the sick or nourish the hungry?
No, it would be done for amusement—a kind of
amusement beyond the comprehension of the two
hunters.

It took Losting no longer to see these things than
Bom. When the bigger man finally realized, though,
he was less subtle in his opinions than his companion.
"This is a horrible thing you are doing!"

Hansen had already evaluated and recovered from
Bom's outburst. Now he fielded this second admoni-
tion accordingly. "I can sympathize with your position,
but surely you can see the long-run advantages, can't
you?" He looked from Losting to Bom. "Can't you?"

"It is not the taking of the chaga's blooms and
branches—it is the way of the taking and the time of
taking that are bad," Bom replied slowly. "If you
had emfoled the chaga—"

"That word Logan mentioned to me. I don't know
what it means, Bom."

The hunter shrugged. "It is not something which
can be explained. You can emfol or you cannot."

"That doesn't make it easy for us, does it?" Hansen
said, somewhat testily.

"If you steal the young of the chaga it will not
seed, and the parent growth itself will die."

"But there must be lots of chaga in the forest, Bom,"
Hansen argued quietly, oddly" quiet. "Surely a few
will not be missed?"

"Would you miss your arms and legs?"
175




A look of comprehension spread across Hansen's
face. "I see. It's the plant you're worried about, then.
I hadn't realized you felt so strongly about such
things. We'll certainly have to see what we can do
about this. Naturally we don't want to pick the
blooms if the plant's going to suffer, do we?"

"No," Bom concurred guardedly.

"It's a minor thing, not at all necessary," Hansen
continued, waving off the look of astonishment that ap-
peared on a chemist's face. "It's a minor market we
can do without."

He escorted them outside and toward the next and
last lab. "There's one more thing I'd like you to see
Bom. This is where some local knowledge—yours—
could really be of help to us. It concerns the kind
of burl that produces the life-prolonging extract." They
rounded a corner. "We've only been able to find
two such burls so far, despite extensive searching. The
tree that produces them isn't rare; the burls them-
selves are. My plant experts tell me the rarity is ex-
treme. Either the trees are extraordinarily healthy, or
else burling's not their usual way of combating in-
festations, infections. If you could find a plentiful sup-
ply of such burls. Born, I can promise you we'd
listen very strongly to your opinions on which plants
to leave alone and which to cut." Hansen admired
his own suave professionalism and the facility with
which he wielded the scalpel of deception.

They passed between two large, quiet men and en-
tered a chamber slightly larger than the one they had
just left. Like the others they had seen, this one was
filled with the inexplicable devices of the giants.

Hansen's introduction of the dark, solemn Chit-
tagong and the always agitated Celebes was perfunc-
tory. "How's the work coming, gentlemen?" he con-
cluded.

Celebes replied, his tone a mixture of nervous ex-
citement and confidence. "You read our first report
two days back, sir, about what we think it was that
caused Wu to go over the edge?"

"I'm in the habit of reading even the meal requests
that come out of this lab. They don't add up yet, but
yes, I can see how a man with Tsing-ahn's habits
176

could be affected violently by an improper interpreta-
tion of the evidence—assuming his burl displayed the
same anthropomorphic mimicry this new one does."

"We think that way also, sir. It's back here."

The two white-frocked researchers led them to a
broad workbench set at the back of the room. Fresh
paint shone with false dampness in the overhead flu-
orescent lights.

This burl had been cut neatly down the middle.
The halves had been separated. One lay propped up
against the back wall of the lab, while the other was
vised firmly to the bench. A plethora of shining in-
struments of metal and plastic were scattered on the
table and around the halved sections like a swarm of
silver spiders. Portions of the burl's interior had been
excised and placed in containers of varying sizes. The
scene itself conveyed the impression of a frenetic yet
studious scientific activity, which had suddenly been
halted.

In cross section one could easily see the outer layer
of black bark, followed by the first woody layer, which
was dark like mahogany. Then it lightened to a deep
umber and turned eventually as light as redwood. But
after the first half-meter it became something that
looked like no wood born of Earth. Weaving black
lines ran through a horrid reddish-yellow pulp. Pecul-
iar nodules of gray formed where clumps of the wind-
ing black threads joined. At the center of the burl lay
several ovoid lumps of brownish-pink, like the seeds
of an apple. Here the concentration of jet-colored web-
bing grew thickest. Most bizarre were the numerous
irregular lengths and humps of some pure white sub-
stance, which lay scattered throughout the interior of
the burl, seemingly at random. Some appeared hard
and smooth; others on the verge of powdery dissolu-
tion.

Bom knew exactly what the burl was, though not
its puzzling interior. So did Losting. "This is what you
take your life-drug from?" Born asked.

"That's right," Hansen admitted. "Have you seen
these kinds of growths before anywhere?"

"We have."

Chittagong and Celebes were immediately and

177

simultaneously all over the hunters with their ques-
tions. "Where . . . How many . . . You mean
you've found more than one on the same tree . . .
How big were the ones you saw . . . What about
the color . . . You're certain they're the same shape

... The fibrosity of the bark ... ?"

"Easy, easy. I'm sure our friends can find such trees
for us whenever they want. Couldn't you, Bom?" Han-
sen broke in.

"We know of such trees and growths. Some have no

burls, as you call them. Others have many." The
two scientists whispered between themselves. "How
many such burls would you wish?"

Now it was Hansen's turn to stumble in his excite-
ment. "How many? As many as we can find! We
can derive a great deal of the drug from one, but
there are a lot of aging people in this galaxy, and I
doubt enough burls exist to satisfy more than a frac-
tion of them. All you can locate for us we'll make use
of. You'll have just about anything you want in return,

Bom."

"We will not do this thing for you!" Losting shouted

suddenly. He put a hand on the axe slung at his hip
and took several steps backward. "Bom is mad and

may do anything, but not I."

"Nor I, Losting," Born muttered bitterly. "And it's
true I'm subject to spells of madness. Especially with
those who do not choose to think."

"What does he mean by that, Bom?" Hansen asked,
his manner far from fatherly now. "You can under-
stand my position."

Bom spun around and tried a last time to make

the giant chieftain understand. "And you must under-
stand it is we who live with this world. Not on it,
but with it." He was straggling with barely comprehen-
sible concepts. "We take nothing from this world that
is not offered freely, even joyously. We take only
when time and place is right. You cannot live with a
world by taking when and where it suits only you,
or eventually your world dies and you with it. You
must understand this, and you must leave. We could
not help you even if we wanted to. Not for all your
light weapons and other wonders. This world is not a
178

good place for you. You do not emfol it, and it does
not emfol you."

Hansen sighed deeply. "I'm sorry, too, Bom. Sorry
because you see, this isn't your world. You didn't
evolve here, despite all your carefully nurtured super-
stitions about emfoling and everything else. Your
whole ancestral line here reaches back only a few
hundred years at most. You've no more claim here
than we do. No, you've less than we do. When the
time comes we'll file correctly for possession and de-
velopment with the proper authorities.

"As long as you don't interfere with our operations
here, we won't trouble you or your people. We'd prefer
to keep relations between us as friendly as possible.
If that's not feasible"—he shrugged—"we're quite pre-
pared to do whatever's necessary to ensure felicitous
working conditions. I'd hoped we could work together,
but-"

"You'll not find any more of these burls. Not with-
out our help."

"It will take longer, cost more, but we'll find them,
Bom. They're worth whatever it takes, you see. And
I'm not yet convinced we've lost your cooperation
either. Some additional argumentation remains to be
tried." He shook his head sadly. "More paper work,
more delays. They're not going to be pleased." He
turned and called back to the single doorway. "Santos
. . . Nichi?" The two guards entered immediately,
sidearms drawn. "There must be an empty room in
the new quarters—that wing's still not up to strength.
See that our two new associates are set up comfort-
ably there. They've had a long hike and need a good
rest, something to eat. Program something nice for
them."

Losting had his knife out. "I am tired of this place
and the giants. I'll stay here no longer." He eyed
Hansen. "I'll talk to you no longer." As the knife
was drawn, Bom saw one of the guards point a
transparent-tipped handgun at the big hunter.

"No, Losting. We must, as the Hansen-chief says,
have time to think reasonably on this."

"Madman! Denier!"

"This is not the time for muscle, Losting!" he said

179

sharply. "It is difficult to make decisions when dead.
Consider the sky-demon and the red light."

Losting looked at the two men blocking their exit,
then questioningly at Born. His expression shifted, his
eyes dropped. "Yes, Born, you're right. This needs
thinking on." He put the knife slowly back in its leaf-
leather scabbard.

Hansen managed a grin of reassurance. 'Tm sure
everything will be clearer after you've had some time
to consider all that's been said and shown to you,
You're both excited, Bom, Losting. A strange place
like this station. You've seen more new things in this
past half-hour than all your people Have seen in the
last hundred years, I'm sure! No wonder you're react-
ing emotionally instead of rationally! Relax, eat your-
selves full." He peered hard at Bom. "Then I'm sure
we can talk about all this again."

Bom nodded, smiled back. It was good the Hansen-
chief could not see into his mind as his machines
could see into the Upper Hell.

The two armed giants led them to a room which
was spacious and comfortable—comfortable by the
standards of the giants. To the hunters the chamber
and its furnishings were hard, angled, and oppressive.
Bom tried the bed, the chair, the single narrow desk
and finally settled himself cross-legged on the floor.
Losting looked up from where he had been staring at
the crack under the door.

"They are still out there. Why did you stop me?
Red light or not, I still think I could have killed them
both and slit the fat one's throat."

"You would not have lived for a second step, Lost-
ing," Bom countered softly. "You might have killed
one, but—"

"I remember the sky-demon, I remember," Losting
shot back irritably. "That is why I did not act as I
felt though I think we are destined to go the way of
the sky-demon eventually. I know this—I will die
before I will aid these monsters."

"As would I," his smaller companion confessed re-
luctantly. "The giant called Logan was right. She could
not explain this all to us. We had to see to under-
stand. And I do understand, but not the way she and
180

the others would have us understand. I am saddened,
in a way. A part of them is missing, Losting. They
are incomplete. The great pity of it is they are ignorant
of their own deficiency."

"They will do great harm in their ignorance."

"Perhaps. We must think hard on this. We cannot
fight the red light of the giants. Soon the Hansen-chief
will desire to talk with us again. He may not be so
courteous this time. The giants have strange ways of
killing. The Hansen-chief hinted they have equally
strange ways of persuading. If they do not persuade
us—and they cannot—I cannot see them permitting us
to return to the Home."

"I have held myself back out of respect for you,"
Losting rumbled. "And because you so often seem to
be right in such matters. Why then do you hesitate
now?"

"Give me some time, Losting, some time. This must
be carefully and rightly done the first time."

Losting mumbled something inaudible and sat down
with his back against the door. Pulling out his bone
knife, he began steadily to sharpen it against the metal
floor.

"Very well, thinker-tinker enemy mine. Take your
time. But when they come for us again, if all your mad-
ness suggests nothing, I will kill the Hansen-chieftain
lirst, though they make a stew of me with their red
light."

Bom slowly shook his head. "Can you not see be-
yond the first rage, Losting? Killing the Hansen-chief
will do no good. When Sand and Joyla return to the
world, another couple will be chosen. The giants will
simply chose a new Hansen-chief." The syllables
flowed sharply now. No, somehow we must kill them
all and destroy this place."

Losting's seething anger was temporarily displaced
by total bewilderment. "Kill them all? Ws cannot even
kill one to save ourselves. How can we kill them all?"

"Kill the giants' machines and the giants will die.
First we must get out of here."

"I will not dispute that," Losting snorted. "The
doorway is latched and this"—he stabbed at the floor
181

with his knife and it skidded away with a whine—"is

tougher than ironwood."

"You still do not think beyond your guts, hunter."

Born crossed his legs and commenced evaluation of
the floor. "Give the world time and it makes its own

solutions."

"Mad," whispered Losting.

It was quiet at night within the station as its occu-
pants dreamed away the long wet night outside. Noth-
ing moved save the security personnel who manned the
scanning and detection monitors which kept the forest
at bay. Outside the station proper, eight of Salomon
Cargo's staff manned the gimbaled guns. With the
automatic alarms quiet, these isolated representatives
of corporate enforcement found nonlethal diversions to

pass the time.

In one turret the crew amused itself with another
round of cribbage, using a board carved from beryl
wood by thranx artisans on Hivehom. Nearby, an-
other pair lost themselves in manuals detailing the
joys of vacations to be had on a certain ocean world
many parsecs away. In the third, gunners of opposite
sex engaged in active dereliction of duty.

While their function was quasimilitary, the station
was not a military operation, though their superior,
Cargo, regarded it as such. Yet no invading squadron
of punishing peaceforcers was expected; no armada
mounted by a sly competitor was anticipated over-
head. And nothing could approach across the cleared
treetops without triggering half a hundred alarms.

So the eight marksmen remained at easy readiness
and enjoyed the somnolent casualness of night duty,
secure in the knowledge that angels with guts of silver

and copper watched over them.

From within, mechanistic atheists plotted to deny
these gunners' gods the ohmage due them.

Homesickness electronically assuaged, the last idler
dropped off to sleep within the station. No footfalls
echoed in the corridors. Only the occasional click of
a relay closing, the hum of untiring machinery, the
soft sussuration of the vital air-conditioning broke the

reign of silence.

182

There were none to grow curious when a small hole
appeared in the middle of a corridor floor. Even if
anyone had been passing nearby, chances were they
would have passed off the noise as the echo of thunder
that somehow penetrated the station's soundproofing.
The gap grew larger as the metal floor was peeled up
and back like foil. A close observer would have been
able to see the hole that extended below the floor
through a meter of ferrocrete.

Two massive paws emerged from the gap, widened
it until it was big enough for more than a man to
pass. A blocky, thick skull protruded, upthrust tusks
gleaming in the dim nighttime illumination. Triple orbs
shone like lanterns as they made a slow inspection of
the empty corridor. The head vanished and a low
snuffling that sounded like mumed conversation came
from the cavity. It was cut off by a single grunt. Two
massive, furred forms squeezed like paste from the
hole into the station.

Geeliwan contemplated the alien surroundings and
shivered slightly at the unaccustomed chill in the air,
while Ruumahum sampled it for something other than
temperature.

"Hear no giants, see no giants," Geeliwan mum-
mured in the gentle gutteral rasp of the furcot folk.

"Many are near, behind these walls," replied
Ruumahum in a cautioning tone. After a final, thor-
ough sniff to pinpoint a very faint, but unmistakable
scent, he said, "This way."

Hugging the metal walls and cloaking themselves in
shadow, the furcots padded silently down the corridor
they had entered, turned a comer into another. A
last comer turned, and they drew back at the sight
of the single giant seated before the final door. The
giant was not moving.

"He sleeps," Geeliwan murmured tightly.

"Behind him the scent is steady," agreed Ruuma-
hum.

Leaving the comer they padded toward the portal.
Ruumahum located the crack at the door's base. Triple
nostrils breathed in the smell of person.

Inside the door, Bom had not moved from his sit-
ting position on the floor. At the gentle snuffling from

outside, his eyes came fully open again. Losting was
stretched out asleep on the far side of the chamber,
but came awake as Born moved.

"What is-?"

"Quiet." Born made his way to the door on hands
and knees. Dropping his face to the floor, he sniffed
once, then whispered cautiously, "Ruumahum?" There
was an affirmative grunt from the other side. "Open
the door. If possible, quietly."

The furcot growled. "There is a guard."

The low conversation finally woke the man in ques-
tion. Despite the nap, the man was good at his job.
He came awake instantly, already prepared for the
fantasized jailbreak. What he was not prepared for
was the sight of a grinning Geeliwan, massive tusked
jaws opened to display a formidable array of gleam-
ing cutlery, breathing into his face. The man fainted.

"Is he dead?" inquired Ruumahum.

Geeliwan snorted a reply. "He sleeps deeply." The
furcot joined his companion in studying the doorway.
"How does this open. It is not like the doors the
persons have made in the Home."

Bom's whisper reached them from under the sealed
entrance. "Ruumahum, there is a handle near you,
shaped like the grip of a snuffler. You must move it
down and then pull to open the door. We cannot do
so from inside."

The big furcot examined the protrusion carefully.
Gripping it in his teeth, he turned his head according
to Bern's instructions. Bom neglected, however, to
mention that the handle would stop at the proper
place. There was a pinging sound, loud in the quiet-
ness.

"It came off, Bom," Ruumahum reported, spitting

out the metal.

Losting rose and took a couple of steps toward the
back of the room. "I've had enough of this place,
mad-on-the-hunt. Come if you will." Giving Bom no
time to argue, he ordered, "Open the door, Geeliwan,

now!"

Geeliwan rose on his rear feet, his head nearly
touching the corridor ceiling. Falling forward, he
pushed simultaneously with fore- and midpaws. There

184

was a groan, accompanied by a pinging sound like the
broken handle had made only much louder. The pre-
formed section of alloy bent at the middle and folded
over into the room, hanging loosely by its bottom
hinge.

Bom and Losting leaped over the barrier and fol-
lowed the furcots down twists and turns in the cor-
ridor neither man remembered. Distant mutters and
shouts of confusion rose around them like a nest of
Chollakees. All at once a man confronted them, ap-
pearing at the end of the corridor like a bad memory.
He reached for his belt—even as his jaw dropped—
and started to pull something small and shiny from it.

Ruumahum hit him with a paw in passing. The
glancing blow lifted the man off his feet and slammed
him against the wall. He was still crumpling to the floor
as they passed.

The furcot rumbled terribly, "This place needs kill-
ing," and showed signs of returning to finish off the
guard.

Bom argued otherwise, and they ran on. "Not
now, Ruumahum. These creatures kill without think-
ing. Let us not fall prey to the same frailty." Ruuma-
hum muttered under his breath, but led on.

Moments later they reached the wide corridor that
encircled the station. Both Bom and Losting had their
axes out now, but there was no need to use them.
The station was still half asleep, the source of the dis-
turbance behind them as yet unknown.

Another minute and they were at the hole Ruuma-
hum and Geeliwan had ripped in the station floor.
Ruumahum led the way. Bom jumped in after, feet
first, followed by Losting. Geeliwan was right behind.

Like a flotilla of fluorescent bees, lights around
the station began to wink on erratically; alarms began
to sound. In the outlying torrents, curses replaced idle
comments as the gun crews rushed to man instruments
of destruction. Alert, well-trained eyes, both human
and mechanical, scanned the open area round the
station, minutely examined the unchanged forest wall.
Within that tensely monitored region nothing threaten-
ing moved, nothing unexpected showed itself.

Suddenly something appeared on the computer

185

screen, filling a fair-sized section within range of the
north turret. The triggerwoman engaged her electronic
sensors and let fly. The burst totally demolished a
small cloud of flitters which had left the hylaea for
the beckoning station lights. That had unnerved the
inhabitants of the station until the central detectors
report what had been destroyed.

Still blinking sleep from his eyes, a disheveled Han-
sen- struggled to untangle robe and hair as he was
conducted by a guard to the hole in the floor.

"A centimeter of duralloy over a meter-thick fer-
rocrete base," someone in the little crowd that had
gathered muttered. The group parted as Hansen ar-
rived. He fought to keep incredulity from his face
when he saw the size of the cavity.

"I thought they weren't supposed to have any

advanced tools."

"They don't." Everyone turned to see who of-
fered the answer.

Logan joined them, pulling her hair back away from
her face as she bent to examine the gap's interior. Her
expression was drawn. "The furcots must have done
it," she concluded tiredly.

"A singular pronouncement," Hansen declared.
"What is a furcot, Logan?"

"It's an associate animal Bom's people live with.
A hexapodal omnivore. At least we assume it's an
omnivore." She turned her gaze back to the hole.
"When night came and their human companions
didn't return or send for them, they must have de-
cided to come looking on their own."

"Interesting," was all the station chief murmured.

Reports and people came and went. The population
of the little crowd changed without shrinking. After a
while equipment was brought and a designated "vol-
unteer" lowered into the cavity. He was not gone too
long before he had secured the information Hansen

required.

Nodding and listening intently, Hansen received the

explorer's report. He patted the man on the back, then
returned to the edge of the hole. The group gathered
around it now consisted of section heads, men like
Cargo and Blanchfort.

186

"Can any of you imagine where this hole goes?"
Hansen demanded. Cautious silence. Woe to the bu-
reaucrat who volunteered inaccurate information! Be-
sides, they would know in a minute. "Don't any of
you even know where you're standing?" Puzzled
glances all around. "The hole continues on downward
into one of the three trunks this station is set upon.
It appears this one tree isn't quite solid. It appears,"
Hansen continued, his expression and rising fury suf-
ficient to make his underlings recoil, "that there's some
kind of native animal that runs burrows through such
trees! All these furcots had to do was locate such
a burrow below the level we cleared off and walk
within digging distance of this floor. This floor, ladies
and gentlemen!"

His voice dropped slightly. "They didn't have to
worry about our monitors and guns. They didn't have
to worry about the charged screens encircling the
trunks. The only thing that puzzles me is—how did
they know they didn't have to worry about such
things?"

Cohoma had joined the others. "They're a bit more
than animals, sir. They can talk, a little. Enough
to make conversation. I talked to them myself. They
don't like talking, as I under—"

"Shut up, you idiot," the station chief said hi a
quiet voice that was worse than a shout. He continued
muttering, "And they expect me to run a clandestine
operation like this, on an inimical world like this, with
a crew like this—"

"Excuse me. Chief," the head of engineering of-
fered quietly. "Do you want me to round up some
people to plug this thing?" He gestured toward the

gap.

"No, I don't want you to round up some people to
plug this thing," Hansen shot back, mimicking the
engineer's querulous tone. "Cargo, where's Cargo?"

"Sir?" The head of station Security stepped through
the group.

"Leave this opening untouched. Mount a rifle over
it with a four man crew, and rotate the crew every
four hours." He put hands on hips and rubbed ab-
sently at the brown robe. "Maybe they'll try and come

187




back this way. No more talk this time, not with one
man already dead. We'll find this Home and start
fresh with these folk."

"Sir?" Cargo hesitated, then asked, "The turret
crews are a bit skittish. They're not too sure what
they're supposed to be watching out for."

"A couple of short, swarthy men accompanied
by—" He looked over his shoulder, snapped at Logan,
"What are these things supposed to look like?"

"Six-legged," she explained to Cargo, "dark green
fur, three eyes, long ears, a couple of short thick
tusks sticking up from the lower jaw, several times the
mass of a man ..."

"That'll do," said Cargo drily. He nodded to Han-
sen, spun smartly on one heel and strode away to
communicate with his people.

"Tell me," Hansen queried Logan, "did you ever
get the impression that your friend Bom might not ap-
prove of our aims in coming here?"

"We never went into specifics about our activities,
Chief," she replied. "There were times when one
could have read his questions and answers several
ways. But since he was in the process of saving our
lives, I didn't think it expedient to argue motivations
with him. I felt our primary objective was to get back
here whole."

"Yet despite this uncertainty about how he might
react, you let him leave these two semi-intelligent
animals free to mount a rescue."

Logan couldn't keep herself from showing a little
anger of her own. "What was I supposed to do? Drag
them along bodily? It seemed to me best at the time
to stay on friendly terms with Bom and Losting. The
furcots saw what a laser cannon can do. None of
Cargo's brilliant assistants located any passageways in
these support trunks! How could I guess that—"

"You could have insisted he bring his pets along."

"You still don't understand sir." She fought to make
it plain. "The furcots aren't pets. They're independent
semisentient creatures with extensive reasoning powers
of they own. They associate with humans because
they want to, not because they've been domesticated.
If they want to do something like remain behind in
188

their forest, there's no way Bom or anyone else can
force them to do otherwise." She glanced significantly
at the hole in the floor where the metal had been
peeled back like the skin of an apple. "Would you
want to argue with them?"

"You debate persuasively, Kimi. It's my own fault.
I expect too much of everyone. And those expecta-
tions are always fulfilled." He looked broodingly at
the dark tunnel. "I wish there were some way of avoid-
ing a confrontation. Not because it would make our
operation here any less illegal if we have to kill a
few natives."

"Not natives, sir," Logan reminded him, "survivors
of-"

Hansen cocked his head and glared at her, his
voice steady, hard. "Kurd, back in spoke twelve I
saw a maintenance subengineer named Haumi with his
face pushed in and his back broken. He's dead, now.
As far as I'm concerned, that makes Bom and Lost-
ing, and any of their cousins who feel similarly about
our presence here, natives, hostile ones. I have an
obligation to the people who put up the credit for this
station. I'll take whatever steps are necessary to pro-
tect that. Now, is there any chance you could find
your way back to this village, or Home?"

Logan paused thoughtfully. "Considering some of
the twists and turns, ups and downs we took, I doubt
it. Not without Bom's help. Our skimmer must be
nearly covered by fresh growth by now. Even if we
were to locate it, I don't know if we could find the
Home from there. You've no idea, sir," she half
pleaded, "what it's like trying to move through this
world on foot. It's hard enough to tell up from down,
let alone horizontal direction. And the native carnivo-
rous life, the defensive systems developed by the
flora-"

"You don't have to tell me, Kimi." Hansen jammed
his hands into the robe's pockets. "I helped clear the
Space for this station. Well, we'll still try to take at
least one of them alive when they come back."

"Your pardon, sir," Cohoma said, his expression un-
certain. "Come back? I'd think Bom would tend to

hightail it back to the Home to organize resistance to
us and warn his fellows."

Hansen shook his head sadly, smiled condescend-
ingly. "You'll never be much more than a scout, Co-
homa."

"Sir," Logan began, "I don't think you're being en-
tirely fair—"

"And the same goes for you, Logan. Goes for the
two of you." His voice sank dangerously, all pretense
of fatherliness gone. "You've both been guilty of under-
estimating your subject. Maybe their smaller stature
made you feel superior. Maybe it was the fact that
you're the product of a technologically advanced cul-
ture—the reasons don't really matter. You probably
still think you talked this Bom into making this trip.
You think you kept him in the dark concerning the
station's true purpose. Instead, look what's happened.
Why do you think Born wanted advanced weaponry
above all else? To fight off local predators? Patrick
O'Morion, no! So he could eventually deal on even
terms with us!

"Now he knows the nature and disposition of our
defenses here, the station layout, has a rough idea of
our numerical strength, and sees how really isolated
from outside help we are. He's also divined our in-
tentions and decided they run contrary to his own.
No, I don't see that kind of man running for help.
He'll take at least one crack at us on his own."

Cohoma looked abashed. "None of which would
matter," Hansen went on, "if he was still sitting back
in that room, under guard. It pains me to have to
kill so resourceful a man. The trouble is this spiritual
attitude they apparently take toward the welfare of
every weed and flower. That's what you two have
failed to perceive. With your Born, our announced ac-
tivities here are grounds for a holy war. I'll bet my
pension he's out there now, sitting on some idolized
thornbush, watching us, and thinking of ways to make
the blasphemer's way into hell fast and easy. Now,
tell me more about these furcots of theirs." He
kicked at the bent metal around the hole. "I've got
the evidence of one dead man and a breach in the

station proper to testify to their strength. How invul-
nerable are they?"

"They're flesh and bone—flesh, anyway," Cohoma
corrected himself. "They're quite mortal. We saw
several of them slain by a marauding tribe of local
killers called Akadi. The time to worry is when they
throw nuts at you."

Hansen eyed Cohoma oddly, decided to press on
with his questions. "What about weapons?"

"Something called a snuffler, kind of like a big blow-
gun. It shoots poisonous thorns. Otherwise all we saw
were the usual primitive implements—knifes, spears,
axes, and the like. Nothing to worry about."

"I'll remember that," Hansen said grimly, "the first
time I see one sticking out of your neck, Jan. A club

can kill you just as dead as a SCCAM shell. Anything
else?"

Logan managed an uneasy smile. "Not unless they've
learned how to tame a silverslith."
"A what?"

"A large local tree-dweller. It's at least fifty meters
long, climbs on several hundred legs, and has a face
only an AAnn nest-master could love. According to
Bom, it never dies and can't be killed."

"Thanks," Hansen replied tartly. "That encourages
me no end." He started to leave, turned back.
"There's also the chance nothing at all's going to hap-
pen. So we're going to continue with normal opera-
tions under more than normal security. I can't afford
to close up shop waiting for your little root-lover to
proclaim his intentions. You'll both report for duty
tomorrow as usual and check out a new skimmer,
pick up new assignments."

"Yes, sir," they chorused dispiritedly.

Hansen took a deep breath. "For myself, I've got
another report to make out, more than usually nega-
tive. Get out of my sight, the both of you."

Cohoma seemed about to add something, but Logan
put a cautioning hand on his arm and drew him
away. Hansen continued to hand out directives. One
by one, the crowd dispersed, each to his or her as-
signed task. The station chief was left alone. He

191

stood staring down the hole for a long time until the
rifle crew arrived.

When they began to set up the powerful, slim weap-
on on its tripod, he spun around and stalked off to-
ward his office, trying to imagine the phraseology that
would explain to his shadowy superiors how the sta-
tion perimeter was violated by two aborigines and a
pair of oversized, six-legged cats.

The director would not be pleased. No, most defi-
nitely not pleased.

XIII

Beneath a broad curved panpanoo leaf which served
as shelter from the steadily falling night-rain, man and
furcot rested on a wide tuntangcle and held a council
of war. Hansen was right. To Born and Losting,
Ruumahum and Geeliwan, the actions of the giants
were grounds for a jihad.

"We can conceal ourselves in the trees below the
level where they have killed," Losting suggested, his
voice sharp against the constant pit-pat of rain, "and
pick them off as they come out."

"In their sky-boat skimmers as well?" Born coun-
tered. "With our snufflers, no doubt."

"Gather the brethren," Ruumahum growled terribly.

Bom shook his head sorrowfully. "They have long
eyes for seeing and long weapons for killing, Ruuma-
hum. We must think of something else."

It was silent then save for splash and spray and
occasional shuffling below the panpanoo. Once Bom's
half-lidded eyes opened and he muttered to the wood,
"Roots . . . roots." Other eyes gazed at him hopefully,
till he turned quiescent again.

"I have an idea of how this may be begun," he
finally announced without looking at anyone in par-

192

ticular. "It scratches at the edge of my mind like a
wheep hunting for the entrance to the brya burrow.
Roots . . . roots and a parable." He got to his feet,
stretched. "Where is the power of the giants anchored?
From whence do the marvels attributed to them
come?"

"From Hell, of course," Losting mumbled.
"But which Hell, hunter? Our world draws strength
from the Lower Hell. These giants, from what they
say, derive theirs from the Upper. Their roots are
locked in the sky, not the ground. They have cut
their way into our world by digging downward. We
will cut into theirs by digging up."

"How can one dig up?" Losting wondered aloud.
By way of reply Bom walked to the edge of the
sheltering panpanoo and stared up into the tepid rain.
"We must find a stormtreader." He turned back to eye
Ruumahum questioningly. "How many days till the
next big rain?"

The furcot uncurled himself and padded to stand
next to his person. The blunt muzzle probed the night
air. As water dribbled off his face, he sniffed deeply,
inhaled through his powerful mouth. "Three, maybe
four days, Bom."

The stormtreader was not too rare, not too common,
and no two were ever found near each other. But
moving on the Third Level, they had located the silver-
black bole rising in the forest on the far side of the
station. It was not close to the cleared area, but the
long, chainlike leaves reached downward all the way
to the Sixth Level. They would reach upward as
easily.

There was only one way to handle the leaves of
the stormtreader. By covering hands and paws, arms
and legs with the sap of the lient, it was possible
to safely draw up hundreds of meters of interlocked
leaf and coil it in readiness.

"I still do not understand," Losting admitted, as
they nibbed the sticky black sap from their hands.

"Remember, the giant-made vine web we first passed
through when they took us into their station-Home?
Remember the Sal-giant explaining what it ate? I once
saw a cruta eat so much tesshanda fruit it exploded.

Its insides flew all over the branch it had been sitting
on. I'll never know whether I looked as surprised as
the cruta did, but I'll not forget the sight as long as I
breathe. This is what we do here, I hope."

Losting was appalled. "We may only make the
giants' roots stronger, firmer."

Born shrugged. "Then we will try something else."

Despite Losting's impatience and uneasiness, they
waited through the storm that raged the third night.
Born knew he had made the right decision the
fourth evening, when Ruumahum scented the air and
rasped, "Rain and wind and noise aplenty, this night."

"We must move quickly, then, before it howls at
us, or even the sap of the lient won't save us." He
spoke as the first big drops began to set the forest
humming.

In near total darkness they started toward the sta-
tion, moving beneath the cleared area covered by mul-
tiple electronic sensors and light amplifiers and the
red light death. They had three of the long silvery
leaves. Each of the furcots wrestled with one. Born
and Losting with the third. Thickly coated with lient
sap they dragged the ever-lengthening strands be-
hind them, until they reached the dark wall formed
by one of the station-supporting trunks. Bom touched
it, peered close. The topped tree was already begin-
ning to die from loss of its leaf-bearing crown and
infection of the heartwood.

Moving slowly they started upward, parallel to the
colossal trunk. Thunder boomed down to them now,
as the still distant lightning cracked the sky like dry-
ing mud beneath a summer sun. Already Bom was
drenched. Ruumahum had been right. Rain aplenty,
this night.

The black lient also helped conceal them when they
emerged into the open air. Wind still carried the rain
to them, but here, directly beneath the shielding bulk
of the station, it was still relatively dry.That was for-
tunate, since there were no friendly cubbies and
creepers to mount there. They had to make then- way
with the heavy leaves up the vertical shaft. But though
security was no less lax and those who studied the
monitors and scanners no less intent on their tasks,

the tiny blots that moved up the trunk were not
seen. The station's defenses were aimed out, not
down. Nor did Bom make the mistake of trying to
mount the tree Ruumahum and Geeliwan had used
to rescue them. That bole, at least, still commanded
plenty of attention.

Bom waited till all were ready just below the metal
web that prevented further ascent. Lightning split
the night-rain steadily now. They had to hurry. Above
him, the web crackled and sputtered with each at-
mospheric discharge. He nodded. Together, man and
furcot carefully draped the three silver-black leaves
over different strands of the web. Bom held his breath
as the leaf touched metal. A few tiny sparks, then
nothing.

"Down and away—quickly!" he called to the furcots.
Within the sealed outpost, an unexpected movement
caught the eye of the third engineer on duty at the
generator station. He frowned, walked over to the
dials in question. There was nothing radically wrong
about the slight fluctuations in current that were reg-
istered, but there should have been no such flutterings
at all. The variations were more than the most violent
storm was expected to produce. For a brief moment
he considered waking the chief engineer, decided
against chancing that worthy's temper. Probably there
was some minor malfunction in the monitoring equip-
ment itself—the B transformer had displayed a tend-
ency to act up from time to time. And it could hardly
be due to normal shifts in the power produced by
the solar collector—not in the middle of the night!

The monitoring chips checked out operational one
after another. He was still searching for the source
of the disturbance when a huge lightning bolt struck
near enough for the sound to penetrate the station's
dense soundproofing.

Several things happened simultaneously.
The ear-splitting discharge struck a tree in the hylaea
to the southeast of the station. There was no shatter-
ing of wood, no brief flare of flame. The crown of
this particular tree was not split or blackened. Instead,
the naked apex of the stonntreader drank the lightning
like a child sucking milk through a straw. The metal-

195

impregnated wood quivered visibly under the impact,
but was not damaged as the tremendous concentration
of voltage was distributed by the tree's remarkable
inner structure.

Momentarily, the mild defensive charge the tree
usually maintained was increased a thousand million
times. Under normal circumstances the entire charge
would have been dissipated into the distant ground
by the stormtreader's complex root system, creating
oxides of nitrogen and heavily enriching the surround-
ing soil. But this time something else commanded the
full force of that jagged disruption, diverted it through
the defensive screen formed by the tree's long, deadly
leaves.

The puzzled engineer would never know that his
meters and dials had registered correctly, would never
leam the source of those first enigmatic fluctuations in
current.

Born did not know what to expect. He had hoped,
as he had described to Losting, to overfeed the pro-
tective webs which guarded the station's underbelly.
Instead, the three grids exploded like pinwheels a
nanosecond following the deafening draw by the storm-
treader. They flared like burning magnesium for long
seconds before wilting and melting to slag.

Distant explosions sounded across the dark Panta,
and lights flared within the station, reaching out to
the tiny knot of stupefied watchers crouched in the
forest wall. Modulators sparked and exploded, unable
to regulate the stupendous overload. The storage bat-
teries simply melted like ice, depriving the station of
back-up power.

Thirty million volts at 100,000 amperes poured
into the station's generating system, melting or short-
ing every cable, every outlet, every bulb, tube, and
appliance within. One overriding eruption sounded
from the far side of the station as the central trans-
former and solar plant were blown wholesale through
the outside wall.

Over the steady rhythym of the indifferent night-
rain, the screams and shouts of the confused, the
stunned, and the burned began to sound. But there
were no cries of the slowly dying. Those who had
196

been killed, like the engineer, had been electrocuted
instantly.

Losting started forward. "Let us finish it."

Bom had to reach to restrain him. "They still may
have the red light, which kills before a snuffler can
be loaded, hunter."

Losting indicated the twisted, smoking gun turrets.
Though the cannons within could still be repaired,
they were momentarily useless. The turret mechanisms
were thoroughly burnt out.

"Not those," Bom explained. "The tiny ones the
giants wear like axes may still work." He sat back
on the damp branch and eyed the sky. "What will
the violent and unusual noises bring by the morning,
hunter? Think! What can several men shouting in
unison attract?"

Losting searched his thoughts, until his eyes widened.
"Floaters. Not Bunas ... Photoids."

Bom nodded. "They must be stirring already."

"But surely since they've been here, these giants
have seen Photoid floaters?"

"Perhaps not," his companion argued. "Their skim-
mers are quiet, and Photoids are rare. Only prey large
enough for a Photoid can make enough noise to attract
one. I did not think of this."

Losting sat back and clasped his hands together in
front of his bunched-up legs. "What will it matter,
anyway? The floaters will see no prey and depart."

"They may well do just that, Losting. But think of
how the giants react, how the Logan and Cohoma per-
sons first reacted to me, how they reacted in the world.
They fear without trying to understand, Losting. And
they must be nervously fearful now. We will see how
they react to the floaters."

Hansen kicked at the still smoking fragments of
metal and polyplexalloy that speckled the buckled
floor and surveyed the gaping hole where the power
station had once sat. Puddles of hardened slag were
all that remained of the complex, expensive installa-
tion. It was not broken—it was gone.

A very tired Blanchfort appeared. Like everyone
else, he had not slept in many hours.

197




"Let's hear the rest of it," Hansen sighed.

"Everything which drew power is burnt out or
melted, sir," the section chief reported solemnly.
"There isn't a circuit, a solid- or fluid-state switch,
a linked module left in the place. We're going to
have to rebuild the entire system."

Hansen allowed himself several minutes to reflect on
this, then asked, "Did they find out what caused it?"

"Mamula thinks so. It's . . . well, it's pretty straight-
forward, once you've seen it."

Hansen followed the other man through the sta-
tion, passed exhausted crews working at blackened
sections of walls and floor. Before long they reached
the access hatch through which an open elevator low-
ered explorers to the roof of the cut-off forest below.
The elevator, naturally, had been burnt out. Someone
had cut the melted wiring and other electrical con-
nections and rigged a makeshift winch. The elevator
was in use now, suspended halfway between the sta-
tion and green world beneath. Suspended right at the
level where the charged grid had once been.

Hansen peered through the gap. From the point
where the grid had been bolted to the tree, a ring
of still hot metal ran like candlewax down the trunk.
Wisps of smoke from the scorched bark still rose
into the air.

"Do you see it, Chief?" Blanchfort asked.

Hansen squinted against the brightness of day, stared
harder. "See what? I don't—"

"There, to the left a little and below where Mamula
and his people are working. There are two more fur-
ther around the trunk."

The station chief stared. "You mean that long
silvery chain that extends down into the treetops?"

"That's it, sir, only it's not a chain. Not of metal,
anyway. It's a leaf, or many interlocked leaves."

"What about them?"

"Mamula thinks they were laid into the grid before
the storm last night. We sent a party out—1 hoped our
two native boys would show themselves, but they
didn't—to trace it back. All three leaves go straight
down into the forest for about fifteen meters, then off

198

to the southeast. They link up to the parent tree about
thirty meters back from the clearing." He turned and
gestured out an uncracked window. "That way.

"It's one of the smaller emergents. Bare crown,
mostly black and silver-colored—bark, leaves, every-
thing. Very little brown or green in it, except in some
subsidiary growth." He glanced down at the clip-
board he always carried with him. "A woman named
Stevens was in charge of the tracing party. According
to her report, the tree itself maintains a lethal charge.
Anything that brushes against one of its long leaves
is killed instantly. Mamula theorizes that when the tree
is hit by lightning, as it apparently was last night,
the charge is somehow handled and carried off. Only a
tiny recharge is necessary to maintain the tree's defen-
sive system. And it's an isolated speciman, though he
says if we look, we'll find more of them around."

"I see. A few of these serve as lightning rods for
the whole forest, protecting the other trees from the
nightly storms. Except," and he had to fight to keep
from shouting, "last night that charge was directed
elsewhere."

"Not directed sir—drawn."

Hansen looked grim. "No wonder it blew out every
circuit in the place. And of course, nobody saw any-
thing unusual prior to this?"

Blanchfort looked unhappy. "No, sir. Cargo is still
chewing out some of his people, I'm told."

"That'll do us a lot of good. Black Horse, it's
done." He quieted, kicked at a scrap of curdled acrylic.
"What does Murchison say about this?"

"Murchison's dead, sir."

Hansen muttered to himself. "All right. Mamma's
in charge then."

"Yes, sir. He thinks he can eventually repair some
of the leads, and we've got replacements for about
twenty percent of the wiring and circuitry, but we need
a complete new generating facility."

"Any cretin could see that. There's a hole where
the old one was big enough to fly a skimmer through."

"The big block of solar cells is cracked—that's got
to be replaced. Climate control is completely gone—

199

that means no air-conditioning, among other things."
"Among other things," Hansen echoed disgustedly.

"What have we got left?"

Another glance at the sheaf of hastily scribbled re-
ports. "All hand weapons and four uncharging rifles in-
tact, so we're far from defenseless. Mamula's canni-
balized a fresh transformer and all the small batteries
he could scavenge to keep the refrigeration units for
the hospital going. And we've got plenty of prepack-
aged emergency rations."

"Communications?"

"Shot, of course. But the transceiver and tridee in
the shuttle still work fine. All its internal systems are
operating."

"Pity it's a shuttle and not a Commonwealth sting-
ship. When's the next supply ship due?"

"Two and a half weeks, sir, according to schedule."

Hansen nodded, walked to the nearest door and
strode out onto the porch that still encircled the sta-
tion. "Two and a half weeks," he repeated, putting his
hands on the tubular railing and studying the distant,
rustling wall of green, the green-brown treetops be-
neath. "Two and a half weeks for a fully equipped first
surface station designed to stand off anything up to
and including an attack by a Commonwealth frigate to
somehow survive a siege by two half-pint loin-clothed
hunters—the bastard religious-fanatic offspring of a
bunch of misdirected colonists!"

"Yes, sir."

Hansen spun at the voice, roared at the newly ar-
rived figure. "Think your people can handle that,
Cargo? Or do you think we're outnumbered?!"

Cargo drew himself up stiffly. "I've got to do with
what I have, sir, specifically, the best personnel the
company could buy." The intimation was clear: there
might be certain things not even the parent corpora-
tion could purchase.

"If you wish, sir, I could assemble a pursuit force.
We could scour the perimeter until—"

"Oh, come on. Cargo," Hansen muttered, "I don't
need a sacrificial lamb, either. Your suicide wouldn't
salve anything. You'd never be able to tell them apart
from the rest of the fauna. They'd pick off your

people one at a time—or else just stay clear of you
and let the forest finish you Off." He turned back to
the emerald ocean.

"I still can't figure out what prompted them to
such violence, though. The desire to escape, sure. To
trouble us, sure—but to counterattack? They've got
to be awfully confident, or awfully angry at some-
thing. I know that Born disapproves of our intentions
here, but he didn't strike me as the homicidal type.
We're missing something. I'd like another chance to
talk to him, just to find out how we've provoked him
so strongly."

"I'd like a chance to cut his slimy little throat,"
Cargo responded briskly.

"I hope you get your chance, Cargo. But I wouldn't
count on seeing him before he sees you."

Cargo relaxed his stance but not the stiffness in his
voice. "Sir, I spent thirty years in Commonwealth
forces before deciding it was thirty years wasted with
no future. I've been with the company four years
now as a Special Projects Security Director. If this
midget gets within arm's length, you can bet your
administrative certificate I'll break his neck before
he can kill me."

"I'm betting more than that on it, Sal." He looked
skyward. "Going to be another hot—mother of god,
what are those?"

Cargo's head turned and he looked into the faint
blue-green of the southern sky. Three drifting shapes
were slowly nearing the station. Each of them was
half the size of the structure.

"Have we any turrets operational?"
"No, sir," Cargo told him, still staring at those ap-
paritions. "But we've still got the rifles."

"Set them up in the dome. Leave a few people to
watch the three support trunks and get the rest of
your people up there, too. Leave the guard on the
tunneled trunk, also. I don't want any surprises from
that direction while we're occupied with those. Move."
Shouts and orders resounded throughout the dam-
aged outpost. Anyone with an operational handgun was
directed to report to the dome. No one had to question
201

why—the three Photoid floaters made no attempt to
camouflage their approach.

Logan and Cohoma were among those who found
themselves clustered beneath one of the now retracted
polyplexalloy panels. Three laser rifles were also set
up there, the long tubes aimed skyward now.

Hansen saw the two scouts arrive, beckoned to
Cargo and stalked over to them. "Ever see anything
like those before?"

Logan studied the bloated monsters, fascinated. "No,
Chief, never. I don't recall Born ever discussing any-
thing like them."

"Any chance your pygmy might be controlling them,
somehow?" asked Cargo.

Logan considered. "No, I don't think so. If they're
dangerous but manipulatable, I think Born would have
summoned them to protect us when we were travel-
ing along the treetop level."

The floaters were gigantic gas bags, roughly ovoid
and showing rippling, saillike fins on their backs and
at the sides. The steady fluttering of the body-length
protuberances propelled them lazily through the air.
The gas sacs themselves were a pale, translucent blue
through which the sun shone clearly. Beneath each bag
lay a mass of rubbery-looking tissue that folded and re-
folded in on itself like knotted cables. Suspended from
this was a series of short, thick tendrils which shone
like the mirror vines Logan remembered from weeks
in the forest. Colors flashed from turning, spinning
organic prisms, giving the whole creature the appear-
ance of a balloon trying to hatch a rainbow. Longer
tentacles dangled well below this glittering, polished
conglomeration. These had a more natural appearance,
in hue a light blue like the gas sacs, and seemed to
be coated with a dully reflective mucuslike substance.

They continued to drift toward the station while a
little knot of scientists huddled by the mined deep
space transceiver debated whether they were primarily
plant or animal.                                   ^

"Ready on those rifles!" Hansen commanded. So
far the creatures had made nothing resembling a hos-
tile move. But their sheer bulk was making him jittery.
202

The eerie silence with which they approached did
nothing to improve the state of his nerves.

"If they approach within twenty meters, fire," he
told Cargo, "but not before." The security chief
nodded.

One of the floaters shifted toward them, those trail-
ing cablelike tentacles twitching in the air. It stopped
outside Hansen's critical perimeter and hovered there.
Despite the fact that it displayed nothing resembling
an organ of sight, Hansen could not escape the feeling
that it was studying them. It continued hovering there,.
long fins rippling rhythmically to hold it steady, while
the tension within the dome and the rest of the station
rose unbearably.

Someone shouted and all eyes went down and out.
The other two floaters were drifting over the shut-
tiecraft—the last remaining contact with the company,
with the rest of the universe, with help. One long
tentacle dipped, to curl around the shuttle's bow. The
tentacle pulled curiously, effortlessly. There was a
screech as the shuttle slid a little within its flexible
moorings.

A pencil-thin beam of intense red light reached
across the intervening space to strike the curious
floater. Cargo spun and yelled at the rifle crews. "Who
fired? I gave no order to—!"

The beam contacted the gas sac and seemed to
pass straight through at an angle. The floater dropped
slightly at the strike, then regained its altitude and
position. On impact a slight wisp of smoke had risen
from the point where the laser had struck. There was a
faint, barely audible whistling sound, that might have
been a sigh. The floater started to rise, forgetting mo-
mentarily to release the shuttle. Distant pings sounded
clearly across the cleared treetops as one mooring
cable after another snapped like piano strings.

Someone fired a pistol then, and the other rifles
opened up. Cargo raged among his people, but the
rising panicky cries within the station all but drowned
him out. Burst after crimson burst lanced out to strike
at the massive floaters. Whenever one struck a gas sac
the injured floater would drop slightly, then puff itself
up and regain its former height. Bursts which landed

203




among the forest of tentacles glanced off the reflective
stubs and mucus-covered tentacles.

From their position behind a tangle of singing
comb vines. Born Whispered, "They are very patient,
for floaters."

"Perhaps they will not chose to fight," Losting wor-
ried aloud.

Behind him, Geeliwan growled. "Floaters' anger
comes slow, lasts long."

Whether stimulated by the irritating, persistent stings
of the lasers or by the noisy milling of the tiny shapes
in the station, the floaters finally began to react. Their
shorter, almost quartzlike tendrils shifted, forming com-
plex patterns, instinctive defensive alignments—even as
the red light from below continued to stab at them.
The sun was high and hot. But within the newly ar-
ranged complex of short tendrils the sunlight was
internally concentrated, reconcentrated, magnified and
remagnified, shuttled and focused and jimmied around
through a farrago of organic lenses, intricate enough
to put the human eye to shame.

From the two nearest floaters beams of immensely
concentrated sunlight struck the station. By and large
the walls of the outpost were honeycomb aluminum
and not duralloy. Where the angry sunlight struck, it
melted away, to bum what lay within.

Hansen fled the dome. So did Cohoma and Logan
and most of the other personnel. Cargo stayed with
his crews, cursing their inaccuracy and ineffectiveness.
He did not realize that the gas sacs of the floaters
were compartmentalized, did not recognize the speed
with which they were replaced, with which fresh gas
was generated in the newly rewalled cells. He failed
to recognize the futility of the laser rifles, which could
bring down a shuttle or major aircraft; failed to even
as the ultraintensified light projected by the third floater
struck the dome, melted away the tough polyplexalloy,
melted away the rifles themselves, melted or ignited
chairs, consoles, flooring, and instrumentation. He re-
alized the failure, however, just as he and the last
rifle crew were carbonized.

The angry floaters remained for half an hour, drift-
ing back and forth across the station. They continued
204

playing energy into the ruins long after the last flicker
of desperate red rose from the smoking wreckage.

Eventually they tired, whatever they possessed for
minds finally sated. Leaving the station pockmarked
with gaps and scorched slashes, fires consuming its
innards, they drifted off to the south whence they had
come.

"Now, let us finish it," rumbled Losting.
"There may be some left," Bom argued. "Let us
wait until the flames have finished their work and the
sun has begun its dying."

As happened now and again, the night-rain began
before evening that day. It was still light enough to
see as they entered the ravaged hulk of the station,
water dripping around them. Droplets sizzled and
hissed where they struck the still superheated metal.
In places the corridor walls had run like butter under
the floaters' assault. Recooled metal leaped and
plunged.

The hunters entered the outside corridor with snuf-
flers loaded and ready, though neither expected to find
anything alive within the smoking structure.

"Even necessary death is unpleasant," Bom observed
solemnly, sniffing the penetrating odor of carbonized
flesh. "This is not a place to linger long."

Losting agreed, pointing down the curving pathway.
"I will take this half and meet you on the other side.
The sooner we conclude this and start Home, the
better I'll feel." Bom nodded agreement and started
off in the opposite direction.

The big hunter waited until his companion was out
of sight before following Geeliwan. He did not en-
counter many corpses. Most had either been buried
beneath rubble and slag, or else burned beyond rec-
ognition.

Losting considered the annihilation wrought by the
floaters. Once he had watched while a curious one
prodded with a tree-thick tentacle at a sleeping hunter,
only to leave the dreamer in peace and proceed ami-
ably on its way. He had also seen one of the normally
gentle scavengers have a tentacle bitten in half by a
startled diverdaunt. The floater had proceeded to tear
the carnivore's tree apart and reduce its upper trunk

205

to splinters before trapping and roasting its attacker.

He wished there had been another way. They were
passing through the far end of what had been the
big skimmer hangar. The swift exploratory disks it
had housed were hardly recognizable now. Most had
their transparent domes crushed in, their hulls re-
duced to slick lumps of fused alloy. One uptilted fuse-
lage held the melted remains of two giants still in
the small circular cockpit, their bones welded whitely
to the metal. Had the surviving giants not pressed the
fight as long as they had, the floaters probably would
have grown bored and eventually drifted off to their
nesting grounds in the south. Instead, these bulky,
panicked assassins had fought to the last, their weap-
ons of red light pathetically useless against the nerv-
ous systems of the translucent Photoids.

Geeliwan suddenly growled and leaped ahead. The
furcot had smelled the smell—too late. It had been
masked by the miasma of the burning station. The
light caught him above the eyes in midjump. He fell
to the floor, a silent, crumpled heap.

Losting had the snuffler up and was firing before
the furcot fell. There was the distinctive soft phut of
the tank seed bursting. In the near dark, someone
screamed. Then it was quiet.

From behind a twisted, bent section of floor an un-
steady figure rose—Logan. Swaying, she dropped her
pistol and reached down with both hands to pull the
jacari thorn from her right breast. A tiny blot of red
appeared, staining her tunic. She stared at it dumbly.
Losting had reloaded when the second beam caught
him in the side, ripped through skin, bone, nerves,
and organs. Usually the shock of such extensive,
abrupt destruction was enough to kill instantly. Lost-
ing, however, was not a normal man. He dropped to
his knees, then toppled onto his left side. Still alive,
he clutched with both hands at his side. The snuffler
clattered to the damp metal floor.

Logan staggered forward a couple of steps and
tried to say something to the hunched-up figure on
the floor. Her mouth worked but nothing came out.
Then her eyes glazed over as the potent nerve poison

206

took hold, and she fell like a tree. She lay there un-
moving, a broken toy doll, one arm bent grotesquely
under her.

From a black tunnel nearby two figures rose cau-
tiously. Cohoma walked to the still form of Logan
and knelt beside her. Hansen continued past with
barely a glance at her, toward Losting. Behind him,
finding neither pulse nor heartbeat, the scout pilot
muttered bitterly, "He's got you there, Kimi."

The station chief kept his pistol trained on Losting
as he approached. In the hollowness of the death-
filled corridor, the hunter's breathing sounded loud.
Hansen had lost much of his clothing and all of his
bureaucratic demeanor. He was panting heavily. Kinky
gray hair formed a mat over the bulge of his stomach.

"Before I kill you, Losting, why?"

"Bom knew," the hunter gasped painfully. A pro-
found numbness slowly blanketed him, creeping over
his body from the bumed side. "He told you. You
take without giving. You take without asking. You
borrow without returning. You do not emfol. Our . . .
world."

"It's not your world, Losting," Hansen said tiredly.
Behind them, Cohoma suddenly looked thoughtful.
He murmured something about empathetic foliation
and forced evolution. Hansen didn't hear him. "But
you refused to accept that. Too bad." Hansen turned
and called. "Muerta . . . Hofellow . . . check his
animal."

A man and woman, one armed with a pistol and the
other with a machete, emerged from the side access-
way. Taking no chances, the woman put another
burst into the head of the supine furcot, but Geeliwan
was already as dead as he would ever be.

"Damnation and hell!" Hansen roared, anger and
frustration finally coming together within him at the
same time. "No reason ... no reason for any of
this!" He gestured around, then looked back down at
Losting, his voice full of sorrow at the waste. "Don't
you see—you didn't stop us! I've got four people—"
He glanced back at Logan's motionless body. "No-
three people left."

Every word caused a sharp pain to shoot through

Losting. Each one was a new surprise. "You are all
dead. All your little sky-boats are broken and so is
the big . . . shuttle. Your little weapons are dead and
so are your walls and webs. The stormtreader beat
the life from them. The forest will come for you, now."

Hansen wore an expression of pity. "No, Losting.
It was a good try you made. You almost did it. But
we've plenty of food, and water from the sky every
night. I know how fast this hylaea grows. It may very
well obscure the station before our next relief ship ar-
rives. It's true our shuttlecraft can't fly again. But its
internal systems check out operational, including com-
munications. I don't believe those gas-bag prisms will
come back, and I don't think we'll be attacked by
anything else capable of penetrating a ship hull. This
forest can bury us under an avalanche of green, but
our distress signal will still be picked up.

"You've managed to cost some people a lot of
credits and a lot of trouble. They won't be pleased.
But they'll rebuild this station, start over again—because
of the immortality extract, Losting., You can't begin
to imagine what ends people will go to to secure it.

"We won't make the same mistakes again. We'll
rebuild halfway around this planet, far from your
tribe. The new outpost will have aerial patrols, three
times as many guns and bigger, with independent
power-up systems. And we'll make a clear space four
tunes as wide and twice as deep.

"No, we won't make the same mistakes again.
You're a brave man, Losting, but you've failed. A
great pity. I'd rather have been your friend."

"Grv ... rbber ..." Losting whispered.

Hansen leaned close, the muzzle of the pistol never
wavering. "What's that? I didn't hear-?"

"You would steal everything," the hunter rasped,
"even a man's soul, even a flower's smell."

Hansen shook his head slowly, sadly. "I don't un-
derstand you, Losting. I don't know if we could ever
understand one another."

He was still shaking his head when the jacari from
Bom's snuffler punctured the side of his neck.

It was over quickly. Ruumahum brought down the

208

pair bending over Geeliwan's corpse. Bom's axe
stopped Cohoma before the bigger man could pull
his pistol.

The hunter cut at the fallen giants more than was
necessary. He was still hacking away at the bodies
long after most of the blood had drained away, until
his fury had done likewise. Exhausted, he stumbled
over to slump down by the body of the man he had
hated most in all the world. Ruumahum was sniffing
at Geeliwan's flank,, but there was no hope for the
fallen furcot. That remarkable system was not in-
vulnerable. Logon's beam had cut the brain. A slow
trickle of dark green seeped from a severed vein in
the skull and stained the olivine fur.

The face of the fallen hunter was twisted with a pain
that was more than physical. "No luck . . . not for
Losting. You always . . . win. Born. Always one
branch ahead of Losting, one word, one deed. Not
fair, not fair. So much death ... why?"

"You know why, hunter," Born muttered awk-
wardly. "There was a disease, a parasite come new
to the world. It fell upon us to cut it out. It would
have killed the Home. You saved the Home, hunter."
His voice cracked. "I love you, my brother."

Born sat there and conjured solemn images while
Ruumahum squatted on hind legs and mourned with
the weeping sky. They remained like that until time
brought a new day and light.

The first wave of unchallenged cubbies, creepers,
fom, and aerial shoots was already pimpling the once
smooth edges of the clearing when Bom and Ruuma-
hum set on their way.

Two bodies—one human, one furcot—were secured
to Ruumahum's broad back. To think of returning
all the way Home with such a burden was absurd.
It would slow them, hinder them, endanger them. But
neither Ruumahum nor Born for a moment thought
of returning without them.

Bom remembered the words of the Hansen-chieftain
as he had crawled near enough to kill him, last night
in the darkness and ram. The words were false. He




did not think the giants would try another station
elsewhere on the world—not now. Not with all their
work here swallowed up whole, wordlessly, inexplica-
bly. Even if they did, they could not find the burls
they wanted. Not on the other side of the world.
If they tried here, they would never get their light
weapons and metals in place. The tribe would see to
that. Other tribes would be told. The warning would
be spread.

Brightly Go was the first to greet him on their re-
turn, when they staggered into the village exhausted
and half dead many seven-days later. She did not stay
with him for long after she saw Losting's body. To
his mild surprise, Bom found he didn't care.

Then he slept for two days, and Ruumahum a day
longer.

The tale was told to the council.

"We will guard against their coming. We will not
let them set their sickness in the world again," Sand
declared when the relating was finished. Reader and
Joyla agreed.

Now there was only one last thing to be done.

The next night the people took their torches and
children and moved into the forest with the bodies of
Losting and Geeliwan. For this Longago they sought
out the greatest of They-Who-Keep—the tallest, the
oldest, the strongest. This tree was the final resting
place for the Home's most honored returnees. Ignoring
the greater danger from nocturnal sky-demons and ma-
rauding canopy-dwellers, the procession climbed up to
the First Level.

The ceremony was chanted then, the words recited
in tones more solemn than any could remember. Then
the bodies were treated with the oils and herbs and
interred in the cavity, side by side. The humus and
organic debris were set in place over them.

Losting would have enjoyed that eulogy. His prow-
ess and skill as hunter, his strength and courage were
expanded upon and praised. By his fellow hunters, by
Sand and Joyla, by Bom, especially by Bom. So much
so that the madman had to be led away by two others.

It was done.

The ceremony concluded, the double file of men
and women and children began the long spiraling
journey back to the Home, flanked on either side by
their silent furcots.

The towering They-Who-Keep stood beneath wailing
clouds as the last trailing torch was snuffed out by
the all-encompassing dark greenery. Dark forest, green
and unfathomable—who knew what thoughts arose
in those malachite-colored depths?

Two days later a bud that grew near the base of
the They-Who-Keep ripened to maturity. The tough
skin shattered, and a small emerald shape spilled out,
its bristling wet fur reaching for the faint streamers
of sunlight. Three tiny eyes blinked open and small
ivory tusks peeped out from the still damp edges of
an as yet unopened mouth. Then the thing yawned
and struggled to preen itself.

Fighting and twisting, the last green rootlets on its
back pulled free from the lining of the seed-bud. They
lay back and became fur, drinking in the sunlight.
Photosynthesis began within the small body.

Mewling at the enormity of the world, the infant
furcot looked around to see bright orbs gleaming at
it in the day-shadows.

"I am Ruumahum," the mind behind those eyes
announced. "Come with me to the brethren and the
people."

The adult turned. Weakly, but with increasingly
confident steps, the cub followed the elder up into the
light.

Far above, a newbom child squalled at its mother's
breast.

Forces stirred within the greatest of the They-Who-
Keep at the new intrusion. The tree reacted, secreting
a tough woody sap around the two forms to isolate
and shield the vulnerable organic material. The sap
hardened quickly, forming an impenetrable barrier to
bacteria, mold, and insects.

Within the high branch, sap and strange fluids
flowed and worked, dissolving and adding, reconstruct-

211

ing and preserving, reviving and reconstituting. Minute
derivatives of the new intrusion were distributed
throughout the whole seven-hundred-meter-high growth
while tiny portions of other, older intrusions were
carried to the new addition from other branches.

Bones were dissolved and carried off, flesh and
needless organs disappeared. They were replaced by
a network of patient black filaments—woody neurons.
Old neural links of human and furcot were plugged
into this vast network. New nutrients energized the
metamorphosed cellular structures.

The process of blending Losting and Geeliwan into
the soul-mind of the They-Who-Keep took forever
and not long at all. The world-forest was unceasingly
efficient. New sap moved, chemicals that should not
have been were produced. Stimulus was applied to the
new area. Catalyzation occurred.

Losting and Geeliwan became something more,
something greater. They became a part of the They-
Who-Keep matrix-mind, which in turn was only a
single lobe of the still greater forest-mind.

For the forest dominated the world with no name. It
evolved and changed and grew. It added to itself.
When the first humans had reached it, the world-
nexus saw their threat and their promise. The forest
had strength and resilience and fecundity and variety.
It was adding to its intelligence now, slowly, patiently,
in the way of the plant.

Losting, feeling the last faint trace of no-longer-
needed individuality fading away, feeling himself flow
into the greater mind formed of dozens of human and
many They-Who-Keep minds, all linked through the
minds of the tree-bom furcots, rejoiced.

"You didn't win, Bom!" he cried triumphantly as
the greatness swallowed him. Then envy vanished and
he was a part of the greater whole, such human moods
and emotions sloughed off like a dead crysalis. The
forest-mind grew a little more. Soon it would add
Bom and Ruumahum and the others. Soon it would
reach the end of its Plan. Then humans and any
others would not be able to come and kill and cut
with impunity. Eventually, it would reach out across

the vast emptiness it now was starting to sense dimly,
and then...

In the forest, Bom emfoled a struggling sprout and
smiled with it at the goodness of the day. He glanced
upward at his beloved strange sky and was unaware
he was looking beyond it.

Universe! Beware the child cloaked in green bunt-
ing.